OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on
constitutional case Mo 15 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of 11 September 2001
we are constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case
Me 15 for 2001, formed at the request of 48 MPs from
XXXX National Assembly for mandatory interpretation of Art. 113, para. 1
in connection with Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria under
the question: can the members of the Council of Ministers take and
the position of "mayor", performed by them in their election as ministers.

According to Art. 113, para. 1 of the Constitution, the members of
The Council of Ministers cannot hold office and perform
activities that are incompatible with the situation of the people
representative. Accordingly, Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution provides that
MPs cannot run another state
service or carry out an activity which is incompatible with the law
with the position of Member of Parliament.

Article 68, para. 1 of the Constitution contains two hypotheses of
incompatibility. "The first> hypothesis is incompatibility> between
the position of an MP and the implementation of another
civil service. The second hypothesis is an incompatibility between
the position of an MP and carrying out activities,
specified by law.

The interpretation that MPs want has been imposed before
all to answer the question of whether the position
“Mayor” is the performance of a civil service within the meaning of Art. 68, para. 1 of
The Constitution, ie whether the first incompatibility hypothesis is present
under Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution.

The Constitutional Court has repeatedly had occasion to express
its opinion on the meaning of the term "civil service", p
which it is used in the Constitution and in particular as to the meaning, p
which it is used in Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution. In the reasons to
Decision Mo 5 of 1993 on constitutional case Ko 6 for 1993 states:

Undoubtedly, the term "civil service" must be understood by
unified and consistent meaning. In general, this is an activity
performing the functions of the state. This activity is performed by
the name of the state and for exercising the powers provided for in
The Constitution is its organs. "

The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in a Decision
Me 16 of 1997 on constitutional case Mo 8 for 1997, as well as in Decision
In 2001, on the constitutional case Mo 9 for 2001.

We fully share the opinion of the Constitutional Court
on the unified and consistent meaning of the term “state
service ”as an activity for performing the functions of the state,
which is done on behalf of the state and for implementation
the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution. We believe
that the activity carried out by the mayor is undoubtedly an activity under
performing the functions of the state, which he performs on behalf of
of the state and for the exercise of its powers
constitutional body. According to Art. 1, para. 2 of the Constitution Republic
Bulgaria is a unified country with local self-government. This means that

the state power is unified and according to art. 8 of the Constitution it is divided
of legislative, executive and judicial, not of state power and of
municipal government. Article 139, para. 1 of the Constitution defines the mayor as
executive body in the municipality, and in the above
Judgment Me 5 of the 1993 Constitutional Court also states:

"In principle, the term" civil service "is used in
administrative law, where it is associated with public administration
and the state administration, i.e. with the functions of the executive.
- .. The conclusion is that the provision of Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution creates
ban on MPs to perform any
functions of the state (regardless of their subject and form) outside
the sphere of the legislature. "

These reasons in the decision of the Constitutional Court give
reason to conclude that the mayor as an executive body
authority in the municipality performs civil service within the meaning of Art. 68, para. 1
of the Constitution.

The conclusion of the Constitutional Court regarding the scope of the prohibition under
Art. 68, para. 1, compliant with the reference in Art. 113, para. 1, means that
The Constitution prohibits members of the Council of Ministers from
perform any other functions of the state outside the functions
their Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister or
Minister. After Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution does not allow
combining the position of "Member of Parliament" with the position of "Mayor",
combining the position of "minister" with the position of "mayor" would also
was unconstitutional.

The adoption of this conclusion requires an answer to
the question whether the expression "cannot perform another civil service",
used in Art. 68, para 1, establishes incompatibility between two state
services (in this case between the post of "mayor" and the post of "minister") or
only a temporary suspension of the implementation of
official duties arising from the other civil service,
whatever would be available when taking leave for the duration of the loan
the other civil service.

To> clarify the content that the constitutional
legislator has put in this expression, the wording of
Art. 68, para. 1 with that of art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution. While Art. 65, para. 2,
whose addressee are the candidates for MPs, speaks for
interruption of the performance of the civil service, Art. 68, para. 1
prohibits the performance of another civil service. With Decision Me 16 of
1997 on constitutional case Mo 8 for 1997. The Constitutional Court is
ruled that:

The expression "interrupt the implementation" within the meaning of Art. 65, para. 2 of
The constitution means that the candidate for MP after
the registration retains the civil service he holds, but does not
exercise his functions. If he is not elected as a Member of Parliament,
their implementation will continue. "

Therefore, in the Constitution, the suspension of
the performance of the functions as is available on leave is determined
as interruption of the performance of the civil service. In that
situation and after Art. 68, para. 1 unlike art. 65, para. 2 does not talk about
interrupt the execution, and prohibit the execution of another
civil service, it should be assumed that Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution
implies incompatibility between two public services and creates
ban on their simultaneous occupation. This means that the members of
The Council of Ministers may not hold any other public office for
during their time as Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister
presidents or ministers, and after their election must leave
the other civil service, not just to suspend
the performance of the functions of this service.

In the present case, the second hypothesis provided for in
Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution, as the incompatibility between the two
duties also stems from a statutory ban on simultaneous
holding the position of “MP” and the position of “met”.
According to Art. 37, para. 4 of the Local Elections Act when popular
representative is elected mayor of a municipality, he ceases to be
MP. The term used in the legal text, a
namely, "ceases to be a Member of Parliament", in an indisputable way

imposes the conclusion that the Law on Local Elections does not allow for reconciliation
to the position of mayor with the position of "Member of Parliament", and this
means incompatibility with the position of "minister" in accordance with Art.
113, para. 1 of the Constitution.

Based on the above arguments, we believe that Art. 113,
al. 1 in connection with art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution prohibits the members
of the Council of Ministers to hold the position of "mayor" held by them at
their election as ministers.