from the NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE SERVICE
on constitutional case M 7/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The National Intelligence Service took an active part in
the work of the National Security Commission in the discussions on
the draft Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to
the documents of the former State Security between first and second reading
in the National Assembly. The position of the service to be provided
legal guarantees for the protection of the national security of the Republic
Bulgaria is largely reflected in the adopted Law on
amendment of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former
State security. Such a law to one degree or another turns out

negative impact on public relations,
related to> the national security of> the country, but> due to
the need to implement the> constitutional right to
receiving and disseminating information without it being directed
against the rights and reputation of citizens, national security and
public order was passed the Law on Access to Documents of
the former State Security, which with the exception of individual texts does not
was declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of
Republic of Bulgaria.

The Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to
the documents of the former State Security expands the scope of
the current law, but essentially regulates the same
public relations, which means that it should not
contrary to the provisions of the Constitution. On the other hand in this
law separate texts allow for different interpretations, which
will inevitably lead to serious difficulties in their implementation. IN
This connection typical examples are paragraph 4 of Article 4e, which requires a reasoned
a written report with a justified need not to disclose the name of
person not to indicate data from which his can be established
identity, and in the next para 5 by decision of the commission under art. 4, para 1
its members shall be provided with non-disclosed documents and
their common connection with art. 4g, para 2, which obliges the director of each
service at the request of the commission under art. 4, para 1 to provide the data in
link to any reasoned report 'without those from which it can be established
the identity of the person, of those affected and of third parties. Another one
a typical example are the texts of art. 9e, points 3, 4 and 5, which give
possibility to apply to all documents created before 25.02.1991

stored in the archives of modern intelligence services or

security without taking into account the fact that they are related to
process of activity, which makes quite a few of them relevant to
today's date, i.e. having a direct bearing on the national security of
modern Bulgaria.

The text of paragraph 2a, para 2 of the Additional
provisions, as amended by paragraph 23 of the law contradicts
entirely of the purposes and the period of time, provided in art. 1, para 1, as it affects
the rights of the full-time and part-time associates of the acting Bulgarian
intelligence and security services, including those that do not
nothing to do with the former State Security or the former General Staff, yes
may hold a public office under para 1, item 1 of the same paragraph. This one
text in addition to contradicting Article 199 of the Defense Act and
the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria violates the provision of Article 6,
para 2 of the Constitution for equality of citizens before the law and
non-admission of any restrictions on the rights or privileges established
of personal and social status. The proclamation of the text of paragraph Fa,
para 2 as unconstitutional will restore what was proclaimed by
The Constitution equality of citizens and will abolish the above

legal contradictions.