, REGARDING: The request of 59 MPs from ХХХУШ Народно
assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the following
provisions of the State Budget Act of the Republic of Bulgaria
for 2001, namely: of Art. 1, para 2, in the part under items 1.11.1,5.11 and 5.2.1.,
Art. 2, para 1, tP, para 2, para 5 in the part, regarding the word “overfulfillment
nation ”ial.8; art.9, para | and 2, art. 10, para. 1, art. 1, para 1,2,4 and 5; Article 13, paragraph 4 and

5 in the part, regarding the words “the bodies of judicial power”, and
the mayors ”,“ art. 2, para 2 ”and“ art. 9, para 2 ”; 69, 820, 8 22, para 2 and 3; 6 26; 6
30; 8 35, para 2; 5 37 of the Transitional and Final Provisions and
annexes Ho Zi Ho 4 of the same law

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

MPs have referred to the Constitutional Court with
request to establish the unconstitutionality of the above
above provisions of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic
Bulgaria for 2001. The request maintains that the specified norms
contradict the principles of the rule of law, the Law on
the structure of the state budget, the Judiciary Act,
Law on Municipal Budgets and are inconsistent with the European
charter for local self-government. By order of 15 March 2001
in constitutional case Ho 6/2001. The Constitutional Court is
admitted the request for examination on the merits and constituted
the Minister of Finance as an interested party in the case.

In view of the opportunity given to me by the definition, I express
the following opinion:

I believe that the request of the MPs is
unreasonable for the following reasons:

1 Under the budget of the judiciary:

Pot.!:
We believe that the text of Art. 2, para. |, Vol. Pot ZDBRB for 2001 c
its share of expenditures does not contradict the Constitution.

With Decision Ho 18 of 16.12.1993. in constitutional case He 19 of
In 1993, the Constitutional Court ruled that the budget of the judiciary was
independent. The executive bodies (Council of Ministers,
Ministry of Finance) do not exercise competence in the process of
drawing up, implementing and reporting on the budget. These bodies only include
the budget of the judiciary as an integral part of the annual
national budget, which the Council of Ministers submits to the National
meeting. With Decision Xe 17 of 3.10.1995. on constitutional case He 13
since 1995 it is accepted that the Supreme Judicial Council has a separate budget,
which is voted by the National Assembly in all its content as
budget of a body of the judiciary. The decision He issued 17/1995
refers to Art. 3, para 2 of the budget of the judiciary for 1995, which is
was adopted specifically by the judiciary, with the exception of
budget of the SJC. After 1995, the budget of the judiciary was drawn up in
compliance with Art. 196 of the Judiciary Act, which gives
an additional guarantee that the SJC will distribute and control to the maximum
expediently and lawfully approved by the annual law on
the state budget funds for the judiciary.

The provision of Art. 8, para. 2 of the State Structure Act
budget (SDB) clearly states that the budget of the judiciary consists
from the Supreme Judicial Council 's own budget and the budget accounts of
the judiciary. Given the provision of Art. 4,
al. | ichl. 8, para Fig. 2 of the Law on the Judiciary, the own budget of the Supreme Court
council is an integral part of the budget of the judiciary in its entirety
content. Therefore, the National Assembly has adopted the budget of
the judiciary in accordance with Article 196 of the Judiciary Act
power. The budget of the judiciary is a unity of the budget of the SJC and
the budget accounts of the judiciary and is adopted in
the annual law on the state budget, as required by the provision of Art.
196 of the Judiciary Act. In the specific case indicated

provision does not contradict either a constitutional norm or a
provision of another law.

The competence of the executive (Council of Ministers,
Ministry of Finance) does not cover the budget allocation of
the judiciary by judicial authorities, as this is entirely within the competence
of the Supreme Judicial Council. To entrust the executive to
distributes the budget of the judiciary by bodies, is
it is necessary to make changes in the Judiciary Act.

Pot.2:
Under Art. 2, para 2

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria stipulates that the judiciary has
stand-alone budget. Guarantee for the proclaimed by the Constitution
principle we also find in the provision of art. 4, para | of the Law on
the structure of the state budget, according to which the state budget
covers the republican budget and the budget of the judiciary.

Article 8 of the Law on the Judiciary defines the scope of the budget of the judiciary,
which includes all revenues from the activities of the judiciary
power and the cost of maintaining them.

According to Art. 9 of the Law on State Budget, the annual law on the state budget of
the country determines the revenues and expenditures of the state budgets
authorities, budgetary organizations and the judiciary and their relations with
central budget, subsidies or contributions.

The budget of the judiciary consists of two sources of revenue -
revenues from the activity of the judiciary and a subsidy, such as
the subsidy from the republican budget cannot be independent of
key macroeconomic indicators.

The annual law on the state budget, developed in the conditions of
currency board, imposes restrictions on the expenditure side of
the state budget, in which the budget is included as an integral part
of the judiciary. In order to maintain the budget deficit in
annual budget laws provide "buffers" through which to
minimize the risk for the stable financial development of the country.
They approve the subsidies of all state bodies in the amount of
90 Fo of their allotted amount, the remaining 1090 being provided if not
the approved budget deficit is exceeded. There is no constitutional
norm which is infringed by that provision. Sovereign right to
the legislator is within the adopted annual budget law to
determine the method of obtaining the subsidy. Nevertheless, in

In recent years, the subsidy for the judiciary has been granted in the amount of
10090 of the adopted by the annual law for the respective year.

Under Art. 2, para 5

In the course of the reform of the judiciary is not always possible
forecasts the amount of revenues from the activities of the judiciary
power. Art. 2, para 5 should not be considered unambiguously, only in the part
"Overfulfillment". In order to ensure the normal operation of the judiciary
system, it should be borne in mind that only it is provided
an additional mechanism to enable default
of revenues, the same to be covered by a subsidy from the Republican
budget.

With the budget of the judiciary, the legislator has limited the amount of
assigned state fees up to a certain level of expenditure,
defined in the annual law on the state budget and any excess
/ overfulfillment / above this level, as unauthorized by the legislator,
leads to the need to reimburse these state fees to
the republican budget.

Under Art. 13, para 5
In view of the above under Art. 2, para 2, we consider that the provision of.
Article 13, para. 5 of the State Budget Law for 2001 does not contradict the Constitution.

 

According to t.Z:

Under Art. 2, para 8

We consider the statement of the people to be> unfounded
representatives that the relationship between the judiciary and
the state, resp. municipalities are rented and as such should be
settle by the order of the Law on Obligations and Contracts. The law for
state property and the Law on Municipal Property, incl.
and the regulations for their application are special as such
repeal the general law. In this sense, the provision of
Art. 2, para. 8 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is constitutionally compliant.
The use of real estate - state or municipal
property, by state bodies of budgetary support, as they are
judicial authorities shall be carried out in accordance with
the principle of priority satisfaction of particularly important
public needs of the population from national or local
meaning, i.e. the use of real estate for “public

benefit ”, which is not in all cases equivalent to the extraction of
specific cash benefit / rent /.

The interests of the state and the municipality should not be
expressed solely in cash income / rents / from
the leasing of building stock. The legislator has considered that the benefit for
the state and for the administrative-territorial unit is a municipality
greater when the judiciary and government agencies are in
proximity to the population of the municipality, not when the state and
municipalities necessarily receive revenue from the buildings that these
authorities enjoy. In this case, the legislator has applied
the principle of equality between the state and the municipalities.

P. 9 On the provisions for municipalities

The expression “Budget of
Republic of Bulgaria ”is inaccurate, as according to Art. 4, para. from
ZUDB, the state budget covers only the republican budget and
the budget of the judiciary. Municipal budgets are subject to
The Law on Municipal Budgets

Under item 1: The subsidies specified in art. 1, para 2, item 5.1.1. “Subsidies
for the municipalities ”BGN 5378922 thousand are part of the budget
relations of the municipalities with the republican budget. The other
An integral part of the budgetary relationship are the contributions of
the municipalities to the republican budget under item 5.2.1 “Contributions from
municipalities ”- BGN 56,361.3 thousand.

The sum of the two components of the budget
relationship is 5378922 9 + (- 56361.3) - 481530.9 thousand BGN,
which is the number under Article 9, paragraph 1 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

In h9, para are allocated unallocated costs in
the republican budget for the municipalities in the amount of BGN 73,581.6 thousand.
They are determined in accordance with the Social Act
assistance and the Regulations for implementation of the Social Act
assistance - BGN 60,000.0 thousand, the Child Protection Act - BGN 1,600.0
BGN thousand, the Law on amnesty and return of confiscated property -
BGN 500.0 thousand, the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic
Bulgaria - 4 9820 thousand, the Law on> administrative-
the territorial organization of the Republic of Bulgaria - 800.0 thousand,
The Civil Servant Act - BGN 3,212.8 thousand. and in the implementation of
other laws - BGN 1486.8 thousand.

The nature of these funds does not allow the preliminary
distribution by municipalities, as they are provided on a basis
actual cost for each municipality.

In determining the budgetary relations of the municipalities
with the republican budget through the Methodology the amount of
the obligatory expenses for the municipal councils and mayors - salaries and
insurance payments.

The state supports the activities of municipalities through subsidies from
the state budget, the amount of which is determined by the Methodology for
determining the budgetary relations of the republican
budget with the budgets of the municipalities, taking into account the economic,
their economic and social development and the built capacities in
the different regions of the country. By means of mechanisms on
the methodology provides protection to the weaker financially
respect municipalities, through redistribution of budget revenues from
the municipalities on whose territory there are large ones built by the state
production facilities, the activity of which provides financial
revenues higher than necessary to meet the needs
of these municipalities. This redistribution is also achieved through recruits
funds in the form of a contribution to the republican budget only from
municipalities defined in the law.

In the budgetary "relations ф9 of the municipalities axis
the republican budget for 2001 cannot be reflected
the provisions of art. 212 of the Spatial Planning Act
(Spatial Development Act), as the State Budget Law for 2001 was adopted on December 14, 2000 / promulgated.
SG, issue 108 of 2000 /, and the Spatial Development Act was promulgated in 2001 / SG, issue 108. | from
2001 /.

Since the Law on Spatial Planning was adopted after
the adoption of the State Budget Law for 2001, the provision of Art. 36,
para 2 of the Municipal Budgets Act, given that there is none
funds set aside for the implementation of the Spatial Development Act in 2001.

The relative weights of the objective criteria are absolute
the same for all municipalities and are approved by the Methodology for 2001.

The municipalities before the adoption of the State Budget Law for 2001 were
familiar in detail with the specific calculations and dimensions of
budgetary relations and the amount of transfers
government revenue.

The National Association of
municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria.

After the adoption of the State Budget Law for 2001, the municipalities of the Ministry of Finance were
provided detailed calculations on the elements of
The methodology and the transferred revenues for 2001.

The State Budget Law for 2001 is compiled and implemented in accordance with
the provisions of the Law on the Structure of the State Budget, and not in
compliance with the Municipal Budgets Act.

The State Budget Law for 2001 contains detailed information on
the amount of the funds for financial support in the sense of art.
42, para. of the Law on Municipalities, regulated by Article 34 of the Municipal Law
budgets in the form of general and targeted subsidies and contributions.

It is not possible to determine them in the State Budget Law for 2001
specifically by municipalities the amounts of financial compensations from
the state and temporary interest-free loans, as the need
of the same is established in the process of budget implementation, as
for the republican budget as well as for the municipal budgets.

It is possible that the municipalities need the Republican one
budget should not be possible, and vice versa.

Providing with the really necessary budget funds for
supporting the normal activity of the municipalities, as well as of all
other budgetary activities and organizations financed by
the state budget is carried out according to the possibilities of
the state in the conditions of operation of a currency board in compliance
arrangements with the International Monetary Fund.

The statement that the introduced restriction under art. 9, para 2 of
The State Budget Law for 2001 contradicts the provisions of Art. 141, para 3 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and Article 9 of the European Constitution
we consider the Charter of Local Self-Government (ECSC) to be unfounded.
According to Article 9 of the ECMS, local authorities have the right, within
national economic policy, of sufficient own
means at their disposal in the implementation of
their competencies. In support of this claim relate
the reasons already set out, as well as the judgment in Decision No 9 of
2000 in the constitutional case Ho 6/2000

The restriction for granting the subsidies under art. 9, para 2 of
ZDARB for 2001 has no influence in compiling the municipal ones
budgets for 2001 and the formation of the size of the budget
deficit. The budget relationship in the case under Art. 9, para. -
subsidy, is included in full in the preparation of the budget, av
the implementation process is provided 90 percent. The other 10 on
provided under certain conditions, as a general subsidy and
do not have the character of a subvention.

In this sense the provisions of art. 1, para 2, item 5.1.1. Article 9, para. | and
al. 2 (including the Methodology under Annex Xe 3) of the State Budget Law for
2001 do not contradict Article 4, paragraph | , art. 141, a! and para 3 of
Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and are not inconsistent with Art.
9, items 1,2,3,4 ibot EXMS.

This conclusion also applies to the provisions of Article 13, paragraph 5 of the State Budget Law
for 2001 in its part “and the mayors ........ under art. 9, para 2”.

 

According to item 2:

According to Article 47, paragraph | of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria
the upbringing and education of children up to the age of majority is a right and
obligation of their parents, and according to the provisions of art. 51,
para 1 the citizens have the right to social insurance and social security
assistance.

These provisions do not give rise to any obligations on the part of the State
full funding from the same of social assistance and
child care. In this sense, social assistance and care.
children cannot be perceived as functions of the state as a whole
delegated to municipalities. The presented thesis does not correspond to art. 51,
para 3 and of art. 52, para 2 of the Constitution, referring to obligations and
special protection for the socially disadvantaged of both the state and
society.

In this sense, the provisions of Art. 10, para. and of Art. 1, para,
item 1.11.1 of the State Budget Law for 2001 are not unconstitutional.

According to item 3:

Under Art. PC, para. 1,2,4i5:

According to Art. 42, para. 2 of the Law on the structure of the state
budget funds for financial support of municipalities in
specific cases can be provided in the form of targeted
subsidies.

According to Art. 6, para. 4, item 2 of the Municipal Budgets Act,
targeted grants are provided in specific cases for
acquisition of tangible fixed assets and for the implementation of
regional programs and projects of national importance.

This does not exclude the possibility of the mentioned “specific
cases ”to be defined more generally - as certain requirements
and criteria for the distribution of targeted subsidies by areas
and size.

The provision to provide targeted subsidies for
implementation of regional programs and projects from national
significance presumably implies the realization of a certain
government policy, defined in both program and
project level.

The provisions relating to the mandatory prescribing of
the minimum costs for the objects in the list-appendix for
the ecological sites are based on the provision of art. 6, para. 4, item 2

 

of the Law on Municipal Budgets for the provision of target
subsidies for the implementation of projects of national importance. This
are the projects that belong to the goals and priority areas
of the national programs for construction of treatment plants
for wastewater in settlements with more than 10 thousand equivalents
residents and for the gritting of municipal solid waste.

According to Art. 1, para. 4 of the Municipal Budgets Act,
the final draft of the municipal budget is compiled on the basis
including the defined budgetary relationship with
The Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for the respective
year. In this wording, this text of the provision should
is interpreted broadly, i.e. not only in terms of the size of
relationships, but also in relation to the specific
or general prescriptions for the procedure for the implementation of these
relationships.

The provision of Art. 6, para. | of the Municipal Budgets Act,
according to which the revenue part of the municipal budget is formed on
the basis, including the subsidies from the republican budget,
are not imperative, in the sense that municipalities are not obliged to
accept and spend the targeted subsidies provided to them, if
consider that the related legislation limits theirs
freedom to determine their policy. The state provides these
subsidies for the implementation of a certain policy - the right to
municipalities is to accept or reject this policy by accepting or
denying them the earmarked targeted subsidies.

Pot.4:

The provision of Art. 13, para 4 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is included in
ZDBRB for 2001 at the insistence of a large part of the municipalities in
Republic of Bulgaria and at the proposal of the National Association
of the municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria.

The same does not contradict art. 4, para. of the Constitution of
Republic of Bulgaria, as these are the priorities in favor of
the population in the municipality, in accordance with art. 9 of the PSA. It's the same
necessary and with a view to exercising control over
the lawful and expedient execution of the expenses.

Shaw vol.5

The attacked norm does not contradict the principles of
the rule of law are regulated by the Law on State Property Law and the Law on Public Administration
the possibility and conditions for> creation and closure of
extrabudgetary funds and accounts. There is no constitutional norm, on

which 6 9 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001 and Appendix Jo 4 yes
contradict and violate.

Sweat. 6 relating to 8 20

We consider that this provision is not in conflict with Article 140 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, according to which the municipality has
right to his property, which he uses in the interest of
territorial community. The provision of 68 20 does not deny the right of
owned by the municipality or the state over the ones used by
organizations of budget-supported objects, and is the result of complex
budgetary relations of the state budget with the budgets of
municipalities.

The action of 6 20 allows for a more appropriate and
proper functioning of budgetary institutions. It should be
whereas these are mainly administrative structures which
perform state functions of national and local importance.
This applies to both budget organizations funded by
the republican budget, as well as for those on municipal support.
The provisions of Art. 2, para. 8 of the State Budget Law for 2001. and 8 20 of the TFP are
as a result of the urgent need to provide
appropriate working conditions for both the state and the
municipal administration and appear in the annual laws on
the state budget after the adoption of the State Law
property and the Municipal Property Act, ie since 1997

Sweat. 6, referring to 8 22, para 2

The existing "provision" on> drawing up
the municipal budget on the basis of the budget forecast of the Main
tax directorate for tax revenues from municipal budgets
for 2001 is imposed by the fact that the Republic of Bulgaria is in
the terms of the currency board and the indicators of the consolidated
fiscal program, including for municipalities, are agreed with
IMF. The need for this provision was caused by
the fact that in 1999 the municipalities exceeded the tax
forecast their budgets, as a result of which they created
artificial appropriations and realized unpaid expenses
as of 31.12.1999 in the amount of BGN 166.4 million.

Sweat. 7
With 6 22, para 3 of the State Budget Law for 2001 the state guarantees in
maximum amount of revenues from tax revenues in the municipalities

Oyudzheti so as to create security in the reception of local

budgets in terms of cost planning and management
them in the respective year. This practically enhances autonomy.
of local government, as the risk of incorrect forecasting of
the revenue part is borne entirely by the republican budget.

In the State Budget Law for 2001, tax forecasts are set
revenues in municipal budgets, which are based on
the trend in the reports for the previous years and the expectations for
next year, taking into account the change in indicators from
the macroeconomic framework, tax risks and others. On this one
basis local government prepares and adopts the local budget.

This paragraph does not confiscate local revenue. The increase
or the reduction of the municipal contribution in the direction of
the republican budget, as well as the transition from the contribution of
subsidy and vice versa, in practice represents the regulation of
inter-budgetary relations, so that the overall economic
effect for the municipality generated by a change in the economic and
social environment at the local level, not to reflect on so
the estimates set and accepted by the municipal councils.

The provision of Art. 44 of the LSA states that they are not subject to
payment of the additionally disclosed revenues and the realized ones
savings. Pursuant to Art. 44 of the LSAA and Art
forecasts tax revenues, it uses the budget forecast of
the state budget) it can be concluded that 6 22, para 3 of
The State Budget Law for 2001 does not change the meaning of these provisions under
in terms of revenue, which depend entirely on the actions of
municipal councils, but these are not tax revenues.

The main item of tax revenue coming to the local
budget, are the so-called "shared taxes" - a tax on
personal income and corporate tax called tax
for municipalities. These are part of the revenues of the municipalities that
the state has shared with the local government with one goal - minimization
of the risk of revenue default, based on a larger number
revenue sources (economically this is analogous to
investment portfolio).

A distinctive feature of shared taxes is the regime for
refund of overpaid advance tax which directly affects
the municipal budget. These taxes are entirely dependent on
the economic activity of the subjects and some of the elements,
influencing the forecasting of their income can not
be predicted. For example - changing the seat of
enterprise (the tax during the year comes to the income of one
municipality, and after the change a refund is requested from the budget of another
municipality, or inability to predict the decisions of the general

meeting of joint stock companies for distribution or not of
dividend, or population migration, it is related to the place of
filing the tax return and the place where you will effectively
the tax is paid, etc.

The smallest economically independent unit in the territory
of the country is the municipality. This means that when circumstances arise
accumulate only in a negative direction this can cause a crash in
local budget. At the national level, compensation is received
positive and negative factors, such as the result of accumulation
only in one direction is the report already neutralized, compared to
the tax revenue forecast is within reasonable limits of
the permissible and acceptable error.

The application of the regime under 6 22, para 3 will be carried out, only
when there is a significant change in the economic and social
activity in this region and this influence has reflected on
tax revenues so as to require a re - regulation of
budgetary relations only in respect of these revenues.

In this spirit I pay special attention that according to Art. 60 from
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, Article 44 of the Law on
the structure of the state budget, in connection with art. 7 and Art. from
The Law on Municipal Budgets and 6 22, para 3 of the State Budget Law for 2001 no
there is a contradiction.

The state determines the size of the rates and the base on
which taxes will be paid, the state collects tax revenues,
the state forecasts tax revenues, the state guarantees
tax revenues in the local budget. The general principle is that
the one who administers the revenue is also responsible for
your actions. The logical lawful and economic
it is an appropriate consequence for the state to assume this responsibility,
by transferring the risk of his actions to himself, and that is
made through the relevant legal text, which in practice is
reflected in 6 22, para 3 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

Pot.8

The provision of 8 26 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001 creates
conditions for regular payment of the contribution to the republican
budget and not to divert it to finance investment and
other expenses.

In the part under art. 44, para. from the Law on Civil Procedure is the statement that
the contributions cannot be determined by the State Budget Law for the respective year.
According to the provisions of art. 35, para of the PSA, the amount of the total and

the targeted subsidy to support the activities of the municipalities and the contributions

in the republican budget are determined by the State Budget Law for the respective
year.

The statement that the annual “ZDBRB
improperly uses the Mechanism to determine the total
subsidy and as a mechanism for determining the amount of contributions.
The applied mechanism is the Methodology for determining the budget
relations of the municipalities with the republican budget, whose
Components are the subsidies and contributions of and for the municipal
budgets and from and for the republican budget.

Pot.9;

After 8 35, para. 2 of the Transitional and Final Provisions:

The obligation of the municipalities to spend the available funds on
Housing Construction Fund for the construction of the dwellings of
owners of expropriated real estate is not introduced with
by-law, namely with the provisions of 8 35 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

The purpose of this provision is to provide financial protection to
a certain social group of citizens affected by past actions
and / or inaction of the state power, both centrally and
at the local level.

The reference to the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria in this case is illegal because of the executive
authority, in the person of the central government and local authorities
self-government, the regulations impose obligations under
the financial insurance related to the compensation of owners
of real estate, expropriated by the order of the repealed Ordinance for
real estate prices with an effective valuation of the property to
1.02.1991 (the date of promulgation of the Council of Ministers Ho 8 from 29.01.1991 for
price liberalization and social protection of the population).
The provision aims to cover financial obligations incurred
before the adoption of the Constitution (July 12, 1991), the Law on
local self-government and local administration, the Law on
municipal budgets and before our ratification of
The European Charter of Local Self - Government.

According to item 10

8 37 of the Transitional and Final Provisions:

The request to declare the unconstitutionality of
the provision of 8 37 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001. The provision of
funds for acquisition of tangible fixed assets and
major repairs of local municipal roads are carried out in

in accordance with the provision of Art. 42 of the Law on the structure of
the state budget. Failure to indicate their absolute size in
adopted by the State Budget Law for 2001 cannot be considered as
unconstitutional, because in its digital part the law is
voted by the National Assembly on consolidated indicators, c
in accordance with the provisions of Art. 22, para. 3 of the Law on
the structure of the state budget (by main types of revenues and
costs).

As for the right of the executive to
distributes these funds, it is based on the provision of Art. 28,
al. 1 of the Law on the Structure of the State Budget, referring
powers of the Council of Ministers in connection with the implementation of
the republican budget.

DEAR GENERAL CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In view of the above, I consider the request of the group of people
representatives for announcing provisions of the State Act
budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 for unconstitutional
and non-compliant with European Local Charter
self-government is unfounded and unfounded and as such
should be rejected.