WRITTEN OPINION

of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee
on constitutional case 2/2001
concerning
request of a group (56) MPs from XXXUS National Assembly for
declaring the unconstitutionality of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (promulgated, SG No. 108 of December 29)
2000) and the same request made by a panel of the Third Division of
The Supreme Administrative Court.

Dear Constitutional Judges,

In connection with constitutional case 2/2001, instituted on 13 February
2001, Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, constituted as interested
party by Order of the Constitutional Court of 13 February 2001,
present this written opinion.

With the received request, made by a group of MPs,
disputes the constitutionality of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on
foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (hereinafter “Law on Interpretation”). IN
the request made by the group of MPs indicates that the People's
assembly has no right to give an authentic interpretation of its legislative
acts, and that the only article of the law in question contains a plurality
new substantive and procedural norms, which are also unconstitutional.
MPs also challenge the constitutionality of paragraph c
The law of interpretation, which determines its entry into force retroactively.

In the Supreme Division of the Supreme Court, filed by judges
administrative court request presented similar arguments to those of
MPs both in terms of the power of the People's
meeting to clarify with binding effect the exact meaning of
legal norms, as well as on the unconstitutionality of the provisions in
The law of interpretation.

This opinion consists of two parts. In its first part it will
the powers of the National Assembly to adopt shall be considered
interpretative laws, and the second part will deal in detail with Article and
paragraph 1 of the Law on Interpretation and its compliance with the Constitution.

1. On the authority of the National Assembly to adopt interpretatives
laws

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee is of the opinion that the National Assembly has
the power to adopt a binding interpretation of the laws it has adopted.
This power, although not explicitly stated in the Constitution,
derives from its provision in Article 84, according to which the People's
assembly adopts, amends, supplements and repeals laws. As a receiving body.
laws in the country under the Constitution, the National Assembly has the powers and

to clarify the meaning of the law in cases where there is a contradiction
interpretation of the law, or the National Assembly deems that such an interpretation is
imperative. The powers for this authentic interpretation by the People's
assembly derive directly from its powers to adopt and amend
legislation. Conversely, the possibility for the National Assembly to adopt,
amends and supplements the laws, but cannot by law clarify the meaning of
one law or another would be absurd. Just like the powers of the People's
assembly to amend and repeal legislation does not depend on the change in composition
of the National Assembly, and therefore its powers as mandatory
authentic interpretation also can not depend on changes in its composition.

Nor can it be assumed that the interpretation of legislation
The National Assembly goes beyond its competence under the Constitution and
illegally enters into the powers of the court. The interpretation of the law by the court is
admissible only in the light of the hypotheses of the particular legal dispute,
considered by the court, and when there is a conflict between legal
provisions or in cases where interpretation is required in order to achieve
correspondence between a legal provision and a norm of a higher order. There is no court
general competence to interpret the law as such, regardless of the individual
legal dispute, and has only the general competence to apply and interpret
the law in the context of individual disputes. The lack of such a common
jurisdiction of the court to interpret the law as such is what the logic of
The constitution separates the court from the legislature. The National Assembly of its own
party is not limited by such requirements, and may accept an interpretation of
current legislation and on the basis of its own assessment of
appropriateness of such an interpretation in the same way as it may amend
or repeal legislation.

At the same time, the arguments set out in the request are inadmissible
entering into the prerogatives of the court in the adoption of the Law on Interpretation
raise an extremely complex issue of constitutional theory and
practice. This question is far from being just a matter of interpretation
laws adopted by the legislator, and is equally applicable to
of laws amending and repealing legislation. This is the question for.
legislation aimed at resolving specific disputes, which would already
constituted a seizure of the constitutional powers of the court.

According to the theory of the constitutional separation of powers,
the legislature in adopting legislation should be guided by
general considerations for the best regulation of the relevant public
relationships. It is inadmissible for the legislator to aim at the resolution of a specific,
individual case, through the adoption of legislation. In the same
time it is extremely difficult to find an exact constitutional criterion,
according to which to assess the deviation of the legislator from the obligation
its not to adopt legislation to address specific individual
disputes. Such a criterion will inevitably have to include an assessment of
the reasons of the legislator in the adoption of specific legislation and
the extent to which the legislation adopted has general applicability or is applicable to
relation only to an individual dispute. Adopted by the National Assembly
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Aliens Act basically reaffirms
long practice of the Bulgarian courts, indications for change of
which have appeared only recently. Therefore, despite the fact that
The law on interpretation was adopted on a specific occasion, the thesis that it aims

the resolution of an individual dispute, although for some reason, cannot
to be accepted as strictly justified.

P. Under Article 1 of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Aliens Act c
Republic of Bulgaria

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee considers that Article of the Law on the Interpretation of
Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria is unconstitutional
on the same grounds as is contrary to the Constitution and Article 47 itself
of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (hereinafter “LFRB”). The law for
interpretation reaffirms the main elements of the provision of Art. 47, as
excludes judicial control over administrative acts by which they may
fundamental rights are affected. This opinion refers to
the arguments set out in the opinion of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee on
constitutional case Ho 15 of 2000, at the same time setting out below
and some additional arguments regarding the individual provisions in Article
1 of the Interpretation Act.

First, the provision referred to in the second sentence of Article Ge
unconstitutional as it is contrary to the rights of the defense and
judicial control over the acts of administration.

According to Article 56 of the Constitution, every citizen has the right to
protection when his rights or legal rights are violated or threatened
interests. The Constitutional Court treats the right to defense as “one of
fundamental constitutional rights, which is of particular importance in
the democratic rule of law ”. In another decision, the Constitutional
The Court notes that “the right to a defense may take various forms, c
including explanations and hearings of citizens whose rights and legal
interests are threatened by various state bodies and institutions ”

The right to protection is guaranteed by the Constitution and by the provisions of Art
Art. 120 legal possibility to appeal to the courts of all
administrative acts affecting them. The Constitutional Court considers that
“Through the judicial control it is specified in the field of the administrative
administration of justice the basic principle of the rights and legitimate interests of
citizens and legal entities The human rights protection function
the state in this case also limits the possible abuse of power by a party
of state bodies - a phenomenon common in developed countries.
constitutional democracy | ... | ” The Constitutional Court ruled that under
the meaning of Art. 120, para. 2 citizens and legal entities are "affected" and have
the right to appeal against an administrative act that violates or threatens
their rights or legitimate interests. Regarding the scope of the exception under Article
120, para. 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court held that in order not to be
meaningless the basic constitutional principle of judicial control over

administrative acts, “such exclusion (under Article 120, paragraph 2) is
inadmissible when fundamental constitutional rights are affected ”. ?

Article 1 excludes the possibility of judicial review of
the administrative acts imposing coercive measures and refusing
issuance of a visa under the FRBA, when the legal basis for this is the national one
security. In the general case, the exclusion of judicial review is admissible by
The Constitution. In decision Xe 5 of 1997 gpo cd. He25 of 1996 national
security is cited as an example of an exception under Article 120, para. 2. Undoubtedly
national security as a public value similar to the basic ones
constitutional rights of citizens are subject to protection by
The Constitution. The question is whether national security as constitutional
value can be determined by a higher order than the basic ones
constitutional rights of citizens and therefore deserves more
Protection.

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee considers that it cannot be defined as
correct the distinction between national security and the fundamental rights of
man on the basis of a hierarchical order, as well as the acceptance of such
order a priori. The constitution is a social contract of the people who are
partially renounced their independence and autonomy in favor of
exercising power for certain purposes, but have kept the rest under
the form of rights and freedoms vis-à-vis the authorities. Thus
The constitution is the guarantor of the protection of the people by the authorities. Acceptance
as a rule, that there are constitutional values ​​above the rights and
freedoms of individuals violates the essence of the Constitution as a guarantor of
citizens' rights. An assessment is required in each case for
the proportionality of the restrictions on the rights of individuals. Gazi judgment
it must answer how reasonable the restriction is and whether it exceeds it
the degree necessary to achieve in the specific case of the respective
legitimate aim.Only through this assessment can the protection of
the rights of every citizen in relation to the government.

On this basis, exclusion from judicial review is in violation of Article
56 of the Constitution, when the act affects a fundamental constitutional right.
As it excludes judicial review and in cases where this is inadmissible under
the force of art. 120 in connection with Art. 56 of the Constitution, this provision follows
to be declared unconstitutional.

On the other hand, the Law on Interpretation provides that “immediately
execution ”and deprives of the right to appeal against the administrative acts,
coercive measures, as well as visa refusals,
when these measures are related to national security, which ev
non-compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights.

The European Convention on Human Rights also sets
a requirement for an effective remedy at national level in cases

violation of the rights guaranteed by the Convention. The European Court of Justice
accepts that “the meaning of Article 13 is in the requirement in the domestic
legislation to provide for an appeal procedure under
The Convention. ” This production must at least ensure
consideration of the complaint for violation of the right under the Convention by a competent
national authority. In the case of Jackal v. The United Kingdom, where v
the applicant was deported on grounds of.
national security, the European Court of Justice has established itself
violation of Article 13 of the Convention due to the lack of an effective procedure
to appeal the expulsion. In its judgment in the Chahal case, the Court took into account,
that the requirement for effective protection raises a problem with the use of
classified material when considering national considerations
security. However, this does not mean that national authorities are exempted from
the obligation for effective control by the domestic courts, which decide to.
refer to considerations of national security and terrorism.With the Court
attaches great importance to the fact that in Canada with a developed effective form of
judicial review of cases of the same type with sufficient guarantees of preservation
the confidentiality of classified information.

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee also draws attention to
the explanatory report to Protocol He? of the European Convention, which
points out that its provisions are in addition to those already in force
guarantees under Art. Article 3 8 in conjunction with Article 13.

Secondly, depriving the court of the opportunity to collect
evidence of the facts and circumstances motivating the issuing authority
the order. Prohibition to collect evidence is in contradiction with Art. 8 and Art.
121, para. 2 of the Constitution.

The deprivation of the court of the opportunity to collect evidence is c
contrary to Article 8 of the Constitution, as it limits the balance between
the individual authorities by the irrebuttable presumption that the authority which issued the act,
has always acted lawfully. The latter provides formal evidence
force of the opinion of the administrative body. The probative value is
formal, as it presupposes only the existence of an opinion that taken
coercive measure is directly related to national security.
Obviously, there is a precedent in the Bulgarian legislation against which
official documents (including administrative acts) have
formal probative force only in respect of being
the statement materialized in them has been made and that it comes from the person
signed the document as its publisher. An irrebuttable presumption is created that
the administrative body (in this case the Minister of the Interior or
authorized person), never makes a mistake in cases where a person must.

be expelled or denied a visa on the grounds
national security. There is an unjustified approach to the legality of
the acts of the administration. Formal probative value of the allegations in
certain administrative acts cannot be granted to any
public authority because there is a possibility of arbitrariness on its part,
which reflects on the rights of citizens. !?

On the other hand, the prohibition in question violates the constitutional
the guaranteed principle for the establishment in judicial proceedings of
the truth. The truth is sought through the evidence and therefore through the prohibition
the courts would not be able to rule on their collection
correct solution. The violation of the principle of establishing the truth is
always related to a procedural violation and is grounds for annulment of
the judgment or sentence. No truth about the circumstances of the case
individual processes can perform their tasks.

Thirdly, the annulment of the judicial acts issued
on an appeal against an order issued on the grounds of Art. 40, para. 1, item 2 in connection with
Art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, v. Goth
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria contradicts the principle of
separation of powers.

According to Article 117 in connection with the principle of separation of powers
the judiciary protects the rights and legitimate interests of citizens,
legal entities and the state. This means that the courts have
general judicial power in civil, administrative and criminal matters
affairs. This general judicial power also includes the power to be
considered all appeals brought before the court. Therefore they cannot
be null and void, but only inadmissible judgments in cases assigned to
non-judicial bodies. ? Although vicious, they are real and give rise to all
inherent legal consequences of the decision. These decisions are subject to
invalidation by way of appeal by means of an appeal by the party concerned, or
protest of the prosecutor. Only the appellate court is the one that should be
rule on the viciousness of judicial acts. The announcement with a normative act
of court decisions for vicious and the declaration of their nullity is
constitutes an interference with the powers of the judiciary.