OPINION

of the Committee on Legal Affairs and

anti-corruption legislation

SUBJECT: The ruling of the Constitutional Court
of 13.02.2001, received on 15.02.2001, with attached requests of
group of MPs and the Supreme Administrative
court by which the National Assembly was constituted as a party to
CD Me 2/2001 to establish the unconstitutionality of
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria / promulgated, SG, iss. 108/2000 /.

At a regular meeting held on 22.02.2001, the Commission
on legal issues and anti-corruption legislation discussed
The ruling of the Constitutional Court of 13.02.2001, received
on 15.02.2001, with attached requests of a group of people

representatives of the Supreme Administrative Court, which
The National Assembly is constituted as a party under c.d. Me 2/2001
to establish the unconstitutionality of the Law on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria
/ promulgated, SG, no. 108/2000 /.

There are two main ones before the Constitutional Court
the question.

1. Can the National Assembly give obligatorily
interpretation of a law or legal provisions? About this issue
The Constitutional Court has already ruled in Decision Me 2 of 1994
and by Decision Me 13 of 1996. The Court held that the People's
assembly may give mandatory interpretation by adoption
of an interpretative law by the order of adoption of the regular laws.

In the procedural case, the established procedure for the adoption of a law is
observed and therefore there is no violation of the Constitution.

2. “According to Art. 120 of> the Constitution all
administrative acts may be appealed with exception
of those for whom the appeal is excluded by law.
The Constitutional Court has already had cases to rule that with
law can not be thwarted by appeals against related acts
with fundamental human rights and freedoms. In this situation
the only question is - does it represent the possibility to be
expelled foreign citizen from the country when
his behavior threatens her security, a violation of
basic human rights and freedoms. In our opinion, every country has
sovereign right to refuse entry into the country, respectively to
expels from it persons who endanger public order and
national security. In this way, no one disputes the right
of the state to deny entry visas to foreigners. | By argument
and utop she has the right to expel foreign nationals for whom
in the prescribed manner can be considered dangerous for

public order and national security. This right of

the state is explicitly established in Art. 1, item 2 of Protocol Me 7 to
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

In this situation, there is no doubt that the Act
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria / SG, iss. 108/2000 / is completely constitutional.

The Committee on Legal Affairs and
anti-corruption legislation considers that the request under c.d. Me
2/2001 is unfounded and unfounded and should not be
accepts.

The opinion was adopted by 7 votes to 1 with 1 votes

"abstainer". paradise.