| SUBJECT: the requests of a group / 56 / MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly and a court panel of
W Department of the Supreme Administrative Court
to declare unconstitutional
The Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners
in the Republic of Bulgaria / prom. SG No. 108/2000 /

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The demands for declaring the unconstitutionality of
The Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria were raised by a group / 56 / MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly and composition of the W Department of the Supreme

Administrative Court.
By order of 13.02.20001 the Constitutional

the court allowed the requests for examination on the merits and constituted it
the Minister of the Interior as one of the stakeholders

on the case.

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE REQUESTS:
The demands of the group of MPs and the judiciary
composition of the Supreme Administrative Court are identical insofar as

have a common subject. They are made by fit constitutional subjects under
the meaning of art. 150, para. | and para 2 of the Constitution. Their consideration is
from the competence of the Constitutional Court according to art. 149, para 1, item 2
of the Constitution and Art. 17, para 1 of the Constitutional Court Act.

THE ESSENCE OF THE REQUESTS:

I consider that, although admissible, both requests are
unfounded insofar as the Law on the National Assembly adopted by the National Assembly
interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria no
unconstitutional. My legal considerations in support
of this opinion are the following:

REGARDING THEIR FORMAL MOTIVATIONS:

In general, the invoked ones are reduced to the statement
to the petitioners that the National Assembly cannot give authentically
interpretation of its legislation.

Indeed, the current Constitution of
Since 1991, the Republic of Bulgaria has not explicitly determined which body
can interpret the laws and possibly by what procedure, unlike
of the Constitution of 1971, which by Article 93, item 8 empowered
The Council of State to make binding on all interpretations of
the laws. Before that, in the period 1948 - 1967 significant
interpretive activity was performed by the Presidium of the People's Party
assembly, with which he contributed to the clarification of the laws, cf.
"Interpretative Decisions of the Presidium of the National Assembly, 1948-
1967 ", compiled by D. Popov /.

Despite the lack of explicit regulation, it can not
denied the right of the National Assembly to give an authentic interpretation of
the laws. In this sense is also Decision G 3 of 03.04.1992 of
The Constitutional Court under k. d. He 30/91

This position is definitely supported by a number of recognized and
respected representatives of the Bulgarian legal doctrine
such as Prof. Vitali Tajer, Prof. Boris Spasov, Prof. Stefan Stoychev,
Prof. Maria Pavlova and others who find enough undoubted
grounds in the classical general theory of law. The last most
little can be influenced by the arguments put forward by the applicants for
the diverse and dynamic representation of political parties
in the ten years since the adoption of the Constitution of
Republic of Bulgaria The argument of
claimants that the legal possibility to exercise authentic

interpretation by the National Assembly leads to compromising
legal certainty and serious prejudice to the principle of separation of rights
authorities as a guarantee of modern democratic society.

I believe that all constitutional principles should
be considered in their totality and interconnectedness. Developed
from the applicants a thesis that perceives the interpretation of legal norms as
a function inherent only in the judiciary contradicts precisely that
the principles of democracy and separation of powers,
proclaimed by the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. Perception
on this thesis would put the same bodies above the legislative and
the executive branch. The principle adopted in our legal system for
admission of different types ”interpretation is an expression of
the constitutionally established principles of division and
equality of powers and guarantees the balance of implementation
of their powers.

Therefore, the opinion of the applicants that
the legislator's right to interpret the laws himself is “hostile to
constitutionalism ”and is a serious threat to the separation of powers
as a guarantee of democracy. " All pointed in this direction
we consider political arguments to be irrelevant to what has been raised before
Constitutional Court request.

Indeed, the Constitution entrusts the judiciary
a function of exercising supreme judicial oversight over the exact and
uniform application of the laws of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
The Supreme Administrative Court (Articles 124 and 125 of the Constitution).
Carrying out this activity, the highest judicial bodies
in practice they give a formal general or casual interpretation, which they do not
derogates from the right of the National Assembly as the author of the respective
normative act to give an authentic interpretation.

The National Assembly can give an authentic interpretation of
the laws. It could be assumed that it would be the most correct interpretation.
This opinion belongs to Prof. Stefan Stoychev / see
"Constitutional Law of the Republic of Bulgaria", lectures, Sofia,
1993, p.284 /. The interpretative act does not contain new legal ones
norms. It only gives explanations of how to understand the meaning given by
legislator. The law of interpretation generally comes into force from
the moment when the interpreted normative act came into force.

By the way, I believe that the authentic interpretation of
the law is a power which the Constitution has preserved only and
only for the National Assembly. It is a manifestation of the legislature,

inherent only in this state body. The goal is to reveal exactly
the content of legal thought. And to be able to
apply and follow the laws exactly, you need to know their exact
content - this is what is achieved through interpretation.

The purpose of the interpretation is the normative act as a source
of the law in which the rule-making will is expressed, objectified in
the provisions of the act. The common belief in science is that it is interpreted
the legal norm as part of the source of law. On interpretation
subject to any legal rule, not only vague, but also by the authority,
who issued it. The subject of interpretation may be the Constitution,
laws and regulations.

The interpretation of legal norms is extremely large
theoretical and practical significance. The correct interpretation with
prerequisite for the norms to be able to achieve the goals they want
assign, and perform their official function.

Prof. Vitali Tajer accepts that with the disclosure of the exact
meaning of the legal norm is obtained knowledge about it, which must be
popularizes, i.e. to become public in order to be able to
build such a legal consciousness that observes the rule of law / cf.
"Civil Law of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, General Part, Title D", Sofia, 1972 /. When
the creation of a law there is a unity between the will of the law and
the will of the legislator. It must not be torn
the legislator is obliged to watch over this unity. He monitors how the legal
norm performs its official functions. Hold it in force only if
corresponds to his understandings during its application. If he deviates
the law enforcement authority from these understandings, the legislator intervenes.
The legal norm must be applied according to its exact reason.
The interpretation is based on the irrebuttable assumption that every norm is
appropriate. The expediency of the norm is determined by its
acceptance, then it is simply applied.

The official interpretation is given by a state body authorized
for this by law, the interpretation being binding on those
who apply the legal norm. It is normative and casual.
Normative interpretation, on the other hand, is also an authentic interpretation
from other state bodies, including judicial ones. Authentic interpretation
is what is given by the body that issued the interpreted act. Who is right
to issue regulations, he has the right to interpret them when
find this appropriate.

Therefore, in the present case it is authentic
normative interpretation of the legal norm of art. 47 of the FRBA, which has

generally binding action similar to the legal norm itself.
It is subject to the specific provision, in view of which it is issued for
clarifying the meaning of which it serves. That is why the interpreted legal norm
is not independent. According to the doctrine, in essence the authentic
normative interpretation is a type of rule-making activity. The reasoning is
given in the form of a law, in compliance with the basic principle that
the interpretation is made with a new legal norm of the same degree. By
In principle, the laws are adopted by the National Assembly - the state
a body to which the Constitution has recognized such competence.

The need for interpretation of the legal norm is
concludes in the manifested weaknesses of the law - inaccuracies, ambiguities,
contradictions that can be eliminated by the normative
interpretation. In all cases, this facilitates the achievement of
the purpose pursued by law. Clarifying the legal function
norm ensures its accurate application by the judicial authorities. More
moreover, the normative interpretation is called to bring unity in
the practice of law enforcement.

Authentic normative interpretation is always performed
after the issuance of the interpreted norm. However, the interpretive law exists
reverse action - ex ps, at the time of issuance of the interpreted
legal norm, such as the provision of Art. 50, para. | from the LNA. This
requirement is met in the specific case, due to which the complaints
of “the applicants in this direction appear unfounded. After
publication and entry into force, the interpretative provision should be
comprehends and applies in the sense clarified by the interpretative law. It's clear that
it can cause interference because it also applies to hanging
disputes and court decisions that have entered into force, but this cannot
served as a ground to deny the right of the National Assembly to
gives an authentic interpretation.

It follows from the principle of equality before the law that similar
cases must be dealt with equally. In this regard, I note that
the bodies of the judiciary can give casually / and not normatively /
interpretation of the legal norm, officially objectified in writing in
the issued judicial acts. However, this interpretation is mandatory
only for those persons who are interested in the individual case, ie not for
all. General interpretation is given in the interpretative decisions of the General
meeting of judges of the Supreme Administrative Court and the General
meeting of the civil colleges of the Supreme Court of Cassation. In this
connection should be borne in mind that the concept of "law enforcement" in
Bulgarian legislation and legal theory is understood in a narrow and c

broad sense. It is law enforcement in the narrow sense that is carried out by
the judiciary and the executive, in contrast to
the authentic interpretation given by the National Assembly and se
refers to "law enforcement" in a broad sense.

Adopting the interpretative law subject to the present
constitutional proceedings, the legislator used the funds
of the functional / logical / and historical-political interpretation.
By means of the first the meaning of the legal norm of art. 47 is clarified
LFRB by clarifying its official function, defined in
its acceptance. With the latter, the legislator has substantiated the answer of
the following questions: on what legal idea is the norm based, what is the purpose of
her, under what conditions it was issued, what was the reason for it
acceptance, what is its original origin and what political
considerations have guided the legislator. The National Assembly is
the body that has determined the immediate and ultimate goals of the law -
timely and effective protection of extremely important public
relations related to national security as a priority
value. They are a means of guaranteeing national security
The constitution and laws aimed at preventing targeted actions
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity of the country and the unity of
nation (elements of external security), to ignite
national, ethnic or religious enmity (elements of internal
security). The meaning of the norm of art. 47 of the FRBA is assessed precisely in c
the light of these goals. Question of observance of the Constitution by
it is up to the relevant state authorities to prevent such actions,
which is also achieved by revealing the exact meaning of the interpreted
norm dictated by the recital to bring full clarity and
certainty in its sense.

Based on the above, I consider that the Act on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria no
may be declared unconstitutional by the
applicants formal grounds.

ON THEIR ESSENTIAL MOTIVATIONS:

The essential> considerations of
the petitioners, according to which with the Interpretative Law the National Assembly
introduces new material and procedural norms.

These considerations cannot therefore be accepted,
that the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA is not a legislative act, no
normative content and does not change or supplement the interpreted norm. C
The interpretative law clarifies the will of the legislator to determine
coercive administrative measures directly related to
the security of the country, for which the main text of Art. 47 of the FRBA
provides for non-appealability.

In addition, according to the text of Art. 46 of the LNA, at
clarifying the meaning of a provision must take into account
its connection with other texts from the same normative act or from others
regulations, even those relating to other branches of
objective law. The principle of interpretation should also apply here
through context. This principle requires that all provisions be interpreted
one through the other, in the context of the whole text, bearing in mind
their systematic place in the part, the chapter, the law and their ratio
with any other member.

In this regard, the determination of a coercive
administrative measure as a measure directly related to
security of the country should be done on the basis of
the systematic, logical and broad interpretation of ZANN,
ZAP and ZCHRB by applying the method of induction and establishment
the cumulative presence of the following requirements:

-the administrative act by which the compulsory is applied
an administrative measure has been issued by a competent authority,

- the administrative act to be issued in the established by
law form;

- the administrative act has been issued in compliance with
the substantive provisions of the law, which implicitly includes in
indication of the legal basis for the issuance of
the administrative act, one of which may be Art. 10, para. 1, vol. | from
HRF - with his actions the foreigner "has endangered security
or the interests of the Bulgarian state or for whom there is evidence that
acts against the security of the country ”;

- the administrative act to correspond to the purpose of the law.

According to the provisions of Art. 22 and Art. 23 of ZANN, for
prevention and cessation of administrative violations,
as well as to prevent the harmful effects of them, can be
apply coercive administrative measures as in a special law
or a decree regulates the cases when they can be applied

the administrative measures, their type, the authorities implementing them, and
the manner of their application, as well as the procedure for their appeal.

When the declaration of intent to impose coercion
administrative measure is expressed in writing, then by its legal nature
is an individual administrative act within the meaning of the ZAP.
According to Art. 1, para. 1 of the Administrative Procedure Act, the same regulates the proceedings under
issuance, “appeal and enforcement of individual
administrative acts, insofar as they are not in another law or decree
established special rules.

In view of all the above, the request is also unfounded
of the 56 MPs and a member of the Third Department of
The Supreme Administrative Court for announcement
the unconstitutionality of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA,
motivated by the statement that the text of the Interpretative Law is
introduce new legal norms.

The other essential consideration is also unfounded,
argued by the applicants that the second sentence of the sole article of
The interpretative law contradicts the provisions of Art. 56 and Art. 120
of the Constitution, as it only clarifies the meaning of the will of
the legislator, expressed in Art. 47 of the FRBA, and in no way
contradicts the proclaimed constitutional right to protection of everyone
a citizen when his rights have been violated or threatened, or
legitimate interests, as well as the general principle of appealability of
administrative acts before the courts.

The Constitutional Legislator with the provision of Art.
para 2 of the Constitution has introduced an exception to the proclaimed principle
to exercise control over the legality of acts and actions of
administrative authorities, by removing it from its scope
a certain category of administrative acts explicitly indicated by
law.

Interpreting the provisions of Article 56 and of
120, para 2 of the Constitution, I come to the conclusion that the norm of
Article 56 refers to the right to protection as a basic constitutional
law in the framework of a constitutionally justified and admissible process,
i.e. insofar as the legislator has not excluded a certain category
acts from the circle of those subject to judicial control. On the other hand, for
the legislator has “established the ability to judge which
administrative acts may be excluded from the scope of
the appealed.

In support of the above is the decision Ho5 / 18.02.1997. he
кдХо 25/96г. of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria, which
notes that the possibility of excluding certain categories
administrative acts of judicial review is admissible “only then,
when this exception does not prejudice the constitutionally recognized
fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens, or where another, higher,
but an explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be
priority protected (such is, for example, the sphere of the national
security) ”The norm of art. 47, para! The FRBA creates an exception to
the rule of judicial review of administrative acts in so far as
with the envisaged coercive measures the legislator aims to ensure
state security. The term "security" should be understood in
its attitude towards the state and the functioning of its
organs.

The opinion of the applicants is unfounded,> that
The interpretative law comes into conflict with the one proclaimed in Art. B, para. from
European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
the right to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by
an independent and impartial tribunal established in accordance with the law.

The norm of art. 6, para! ECHICOS sets requirements for
a fair trial without absolutizing the judicial appeal. Each
a state party to the Convention has a certain freedom to
realization of goals permissible by the Constitution and the law.
The Bulgarian constitutional legislator within the framework provided in
the convention opportunity has created the text of Article 120, paragraph 2 of the CRB. In this
Decision LHo5 / 18.02.1997 under cd. 25/96 on
The Constitutional Court, according to which the introduction of a restriction on
the appealability of a certain category of administrative acts under
court order, for which this is provided by law, does not contradict
the provisions of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; and
the analogous provision of Art. 6, vol. | of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
human rights and fundamental freedoms, adopted by the Council of Europe,
ratified by a law adopted by the National Assembly on July 31, 1992 - SG, iss. 66 of
14.08.1992 / promulgated, SG, no. 80 of 2.10.1992, in force since 7.09.1992 /,
which is a basic international legal document for the protection of the rights of

man.
The provision of Art. 6 of the CPIC defines the general

regulatory framework for creating an environment for effective remedies
of civil rights and fundamental freedoms, within the civil
or criminal proceedings. As for the administrative

proceedings, the European Court of Human Rights allows
a wider discretion of states in determining
"the effectiveness of the pool of resources" (Leander v
Sweden 1987). The Court further clarifies that the right to effective
remedies can be "subject to inherent
contextual limitations "in cases of national considerations
security.

In addition to the "above", the comparative
historical review of the Bulgarian and foreign legislation
indicates the presence of a sufficiently wide range and for example
variety of admissible by the Constitution and legislation
criteria for the legislative definition of acts excluded from
judicial control. There are some basic criteria such as
material, institutional, functional, procedural, as well as
criterion based on the specific content and subject of
the administrative act. In order to clarify the “category of
the administrative acts, which in the sense of the provision of art. 47
of the FRBA are excluded from judicial review, the legislator in
The Interpretative Law has chosen one of the above criteria -
indication of the legal basis for issuing the administrative act.

Based on the above> arguments> for
non-appealability of this category of acts, as well as due to the fact that Art.
47, para 2 of the FRBA, requires indication only of the legal basis for
issuance of orders under para. 1, I believe that there is no
legal possibility for the court to collect evidence of the facts and
the circumstances that motivated the issuance of this category of orders,
in so far as its law enforcement activity covers only
verification of the legal basis. Therefore it cannot be
shared the opinion of the claimants that the fourth sentence of
The interpretative law contradicts Art. 8, Art. 117, para 2 and Art. 121, para 2 of
The Constitution.

The request also develops the thesis that with the third sentence of the article
solely of the Interpretative Law, the legislator gives instructions to the court
how and on what legal grounds to decide the cases, “which is in
contradiction with art. 4, para 1, art. 8, para 1, art. 117, art. 120, para 1, art. 121, para! and
para 2 of the Constitution. The cited constitutional provisions do not
support the request, on the contrary, are arguments for his
rejection. The independence of the judiciary is by no means
infringes by the Interpretative Law because it neither commands nor does
instruct the court on how to decide cases, uphold or reject the appeal, a

has clarified the legal situation that gives rise to the interpreted legal
norm in view of its uniform and accurate application.

At the same time, the descriptions in the request are puzzling
hypothetical case for issuance of a null and void administrative act.
According to the plaintiffs, despite its flaw, it would have legal consequences
for the addressee, and because he falls into the category of acts,
unappealable, the addressee would be deprived of the right to
refer to a court to declare the act null and void. It should be
noted that according to the basic principles of law, null and void
acts do not give rise and can never give rise to legal consequences. IN
Bulgarian and world legal doctrine (Prof. Dr. K. Lazarov,
"Invalidity of administrative acts", Sofia, 1998)
takes the view that “there is no difference between the insignificant and
non-existent administrative acts, as one act is
non-existent when it lacks such an essential element that it does not
need to be canceled, it can only be found that in
there is really no act. " All this can rightly be
say about the null and void acts.

It should also be borne in mind that there is none
legal impediment to the addressee of such an act to use the legal one
opportunity provided for in the State Liability Act for
damages caused to citizens. According to Art. 2, para. 2 of this law,
“When the damages are caused by a null and void administrative act or by
illegal action or inaction, the nullity of the act, respectively
the illegality of the act or omission is established
by the court before which the claim for compensation has been filed ”.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Please disregard what the group has done
MPs and members of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court requests for javan
the unconstitutionality of the Wi Interpretation Act
for foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria.