OPINION

from
lawyer Mikhail Ekimdzhiev
Plovdiv, Otets Paisiy Ho21 Street, tel / fax: 032 26 4097,
Plenipotentiary of the Association for European Integration and Human Rights -
Plovdiv

1. PROCEDURE.

By Order of the Constitutional Court of 3 May 2001. “Association for
European integration and human rights ”was constituted as a stakeholder
party to the constitutional case He 12/2001.

The case was initiated at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria
for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para of the Law on the Election of
MPs / ZINP /, according to which:

"During the election campaign, the registered candidates for
MPs and advocates may not be detained and
brought to criminal responsibility, except in the cases of severe cases
a crime ”.

P. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE REQUEST TO THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION.

The main legal arguments of the Prosecutor General of the Republic
can be summarized as follows:

2.1. At the formal legal level it is argued that criminal law
immunity, as a specific exception to the constitutional principle of equality
of citizens before the law, can be provided only in
The Constitution. In support of this opinion, the provisions of Article 69 are indicated,
70,147,132 of the Constitution, regulating the abolition of criminal
responsibility and inviolability of certain categories of persons - people
representatives, judges, prosecutors, investigators.

Based on these examples, the thesis is argued that it is not possible by law
creates immunity for persons other than those exhaustively specified in the Constitution.

2.2. In substantive terms, the Prosecutor General claims that the provision
of art. 53, para 1 of ZINP contradicts the constitutional principle of equality of

citizens, objectified in the provision of Art. b, para 2 of the Constitution, according to
which:

“Il. 6 (2) All citizens are equal before the law. None are allowed
restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political
affiliation, personal and social status or property status. "

In support of that view, the applicant refers to the provisions of
Article 127, item | and Article 31, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, according to which:

Art. 127 The Prosecutor's Office monitors the observance of the law by:
1. bring to justice the persons who have committed
crimes, and upholds the charge in criminal cases of a general nature;

Article 31, paragraph | Anyone charged with a crime should be handed over to
the judiciary within the legally prescribed period.

The Prosecutor General also claims that the challenged provision of Article 53, para from
ZINP ”can seriously impede the prosecution of
perpetrators of crimes, including serious crimes ”.

W. LEGAL ANALYSIS

3.1. For the correct definition of the subject and the constitutional aspects of
the problem under consideration, I consider it appropriate to accept the "a rpot" fiction that
the request of the Chief Prosecutor is well-founded and art. 53, para! from ZINP is
unconstitutional. In practice, this would mean that within 29-
the daily term of the election campaign, the bodies of the Police, the Investigation and
The prosecution could take repressive measures / arrest,
formation of a preliminary investigation, detention / against everyone
candidate for MP and thus de Easo to predetermine
the failure of his candidacy.

In this context, the Prosecutor General's request configured two
fundamental constitutional principles of the rule of law - the principle of
equality of citizens before the law / art. b, para 2 / and the principle of division of
the authorities / art. 8, para 1 /.

In this respect, the task of the Constitutional Court in the present case is to
find the optimal, from the point of view of law and public interest, balance in
the outlined competition of basic constitutional principles.

In my opinion, the appropriate starting position in the search for this balance is
the provision of Art.!, para 1 of the Constitution, according to which “Bulgaria is a republic with
parliamentary government ”The constitutionally established supremacy of
Parliament assumes the highest degree of reliability of the normative
guarantees, both for independence in its operation and for the conditions of
its formation.

From this point of view, the immunity of the regulated in art. 53, para 1 of ZINP
candidates for MPs can be considered as one

Art. 5 of the PPC “Against persons who enjoy immunity with respect to
of the criminal jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria, the procedural actions,
provided for in this Code may be carried out only in accordance with the rules
of international law. "

Therefore, at the formal legal level, the fact that the immunity of
candidates for MPs was introduced by law without having a corresponding
constitutional text does not lead to unconstitutionality of the provision of

Article 53, para. from ZINP.

3.3. The opinion of the Prosecutor General that
the provision of art. 53, para of the Law on Public Procurement contradicts Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution,
according to which:

"All citizens are equal before the law. "None of them are allowed
restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political
affiliation, personal and social status or property status. "

This is because in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Basic Law they are exhaustively indicated
social characteristics excluding restrictions on the rights or granting of
privileges./ The Constitutional Court has expressed its unequivocal opinion on
this issue in Decision Ho 14 of 10.11.1992. on the constitutional case Ho 14/92 / V
the same decision the CC held that in terms of features and criteria that are not
exhaustively listed in Article 6, paragraph 2, the Constitution allows certain restrictions
rights and granting privileges to certain social groups. In all
these cases, according to the Constitutional Court, are socially necessary and social
justified privileges, while maintaining the primacy of the principle of equality of arms
all citizens before the law.

I consider that this view, by analogy, can be reproduced in
the present case. In the case under consideration, the quality “candidate for the people
representative ”does not correspond to any of the limited ones listed in art. 6, para 2,
social criteria in respect of which the Constitution excludes any
form of inequality. On the other hand, as stated above,
the provision of art. 53 para of the ZINP introduces a short - term privilege for
a narrow circle of persons who serve the public “interest and the defensible
constitutional principles.

3.4. I consider that the cited by the submitter of the request art. 127, item 1 and art. 31, para 1
of the Constitution have no direct bearing on the issue under consideration.

3.4.А. The first of these provisions> guarantees
bringing to justice “the perpetrators
crimes ”.

Because, according to Article 54 of the Law on Public Procurement, the election campaign continues
exactly 29 days, it could hardly be assumed that the impossibility of a candidate for
a Member of Parliament to be detained or prosecuted
it was during this period that the criminal repression would be thwarted.

socially acceptable exception to the principle of equality of citizens before
of the law.

In support of this view, I put forward the following arguments:

Possible dropping of the one guaranteed by the Law> criminal
the inviolability of candidates would jeopardize:

A / The possibility, in case of possible loss of immunity, the organs
the police and the judiciary to take compromising actions
candidates for MPs is able to spoil the electoral vote.
This would actually jeopardize the selective guaranteed in Article 42 of the Constitution
right.

B / The principle of separation of powers / art. 8 para 1 /

The ability for the executive and the judiciary to manipulate
the election campaign and to influence the composition of the future parliament, in case
the waiver of the immunity of the candidates for MPs would inevitably
led to a disturbance of the balance between the authorities to the detriment of the legislature.

C / The possibility to distort the principles of formation of
Parliament, and through them the independence of the National Assembly, as supreme
legislative body, creates a real danger of distorting the principle of
the people's sovereignty referred to in Art. para 2 of the Constitution, according to which “The whole
state power comes from the people ”.

The violation of these fundamental constitutional principles is in
able to discredit the very essence of the "rule of law" and
parliamentarism as a form of government.

Against the background of these very real dangers for the post-totalitarian state,
far more acceptable, from the point of view of the public interest, it seems
granting a short-term / 29 days / privilege to an insignificant, c
statistical plan, number of persons nominated for MPs.

Based on these considerations, I consider that, in general, the provision of
Article 53, para. of the ZINP is a justified, admissible and even necessary, from the point of view
point of law, the public interest and the Constitution itself, with the exception of
the principle of equality of citizens before the law.

The following arguments against the request of
The Chief Prosecutor:

3.2. The claim of the petitioner that criminal is not convincing
immunity cannot be introduced by law. It is not such a constitutional principle
objectified declaratively in the provisions of the Constitution, nor can it be
deduced categorically from the norms of the current Bulgarian legislation.
Sufficiently convincing in this regard is the fact that Article 5 of the Penal Code and Article 3, paragraph 2 of the Penal Code,
although by reference to the norms of international law, regulate
immunity of certain categories of foreign nationals.

Art. 3, para! of the Penal Code “The Penal Code applies to all
crimes committed on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria.

para 2 The issue of the responsibility of foreigners who use
immunity in respect of the criminal jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria
decides in accordance with the norms of international law adopted by it. "

 

3.4.B. According to Article 31, paragraph 1, indicated by the Prosecutor General from
The Constitution:

"Everyone accused of a crime should be brought to justice
authority within the legally prescribed period. ”

This text is definitely irrelevant to the content of Article 53, para. from
ZINP, as it is its provision that makes the categories incompatible
"Accused of a crime" and "candidate for MP". Obviously
the constitutional text means "anyone" who by virtue of the act
law, can be charged with a crime, not "everyone", even when the law
forbids this.

3.5. A certain concern in terms of human rights is the statement of
the submitter of the request that the provision of art. 53, para from ZINP ”can seriously
hinder the prosecution of perpetrators of crimes, in this

?

number of serious crimes ”According to Article 31, paragraph 3 of the Constitution
"" The accused shall be presumed innocent until the contrary is established by an entry into force

sentence ”. Therefore, “perpetrators of crimes, within the meaning of
The Constitution are only persons who have already been convicted. Obviously the criminal
persecution against them cannot be difficult, as it is over
with an effective sentence.

The concern from the quoted opinion comes not so much from the legal one
its paradoxicality, as much as the readiness expressed in it by the candidates for the people
representatives, and rpop! to be qualified as potential criminals.

I believe that this is the "argument" of the Prosecutor General of the Republic
Bulgaria, in itself, proves that in the conditions of the post-totalitarian state it does not
there are unnecessary additional guarantees for the rule of law and the People's Law
assembly as a legislative body.

In the above context, I consider that the request of the Prosecutor General for
declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para of the PDO should be
rejected as regards the criminal integrity of the candidates for
MPs and could only be respected in respect of
immunity of their advocates.

Arguments for the public necessity and justification of the privileges
of the candidates could not be defended with the same persuasiveness
in respect of advocates. Therefore, with regard to their immunity, c
in accordance with the request of the Prosecutor General, priority should be given to
the constitutional principle of equality of citizens before the law. By
In the case of advocates, this principle is not so directly confronted with
the supremacy of Parliament, popular sovereignty, the separation of powers, and
freedom of suffrage.

TU. CONCLUSION.

Based on the above, I consider that the Constitutional Court of the Republic
Bulgaria could declare unconstitutional the provision of Article 53, para.

of the ZINP only regarding the words “and the advocates”, and the rest of the request of
The Attorney General should be dismissed.
OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on

constitutional case Me 12 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

As of May 3, 2001, we have been constituted as
an interested party in the constitutional case Mo 12 for 2001,
formed at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria for
establishing the unconstitutionality of Art. 53, para. 1 of the Law on
election of MPs (ZINP).

The request states that Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP, according to which under
during the election campaign the registered candidates for the people
representatives and advocates may not be detained and
brought to criminal responsibility except in the cases of found
serious crime, contrary to the constitutional principle of
equality of citizens - Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria. It is maintained that the Constitution determines not only the basic
principle of equality of citizens, and all exceptions to it in
the field of criminal law.

The clarification of the compliance of art. 53, para. 1 of ZINP s
The Constitution as follows from the request of the Prosecutor General,
In our opinion, two main questions need to be answered:

- whether Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP creates privileges for individuals
citizens based on any of the social features specified in Art. 6,
al. 2 of the Constitution;

- whether the Constitution, regulating restrictions in criminal
liability of persons holding certain positions (Art. 69 and Art. 70,
Art. 103, para. Ti4 ichl. 132, para. 1) excludes the possibility of such a regulation
in respect of other persons to be contained in law.

As stated in the grounds of Decision Mo 14 of
The 1992 Constitutional Court in Constitutional Case No. 14 of 1992,
equality before the law means equality of all citizens
before the normative acts and obligation for their equal treatment by
state power. Article 6, para. 2 of the Constitution prohibits them to be
restrict rights or create privileges based on
race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion,
education, “beliefs, political affiliation, personal and
social status or property status. According to the same
decision of the Constitutional Court social signs of non-admission
restrictions on the rights or granting of privileges referred to in Art.
6, para. 2 are listed exhaustively.

It is not clear from the request which of the social features under Art. 6,
al. 2 is the basis of the privilege under Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP according to
the Attorney General. In our opinion, the special status of the registered persons
for participation in the elections as candidates for Members of Parliament and of
their advocates is not a privilege of a separate group of citizens,
based on some of those specified in Art. b, para. 2 of the Social Constitution
signs, but is a privilege established to ensure freedom
exercising the active and passive suffrage. Status of
candidate for MP can acquire anyone who
meets the conditions under Art. 65, para. 1 of the Constitution and is registered
for participation in the elections as a candidate for Member of Parliament. Status of
an advocate can also be acquired by any citizen who registers
under the conditions and by the order, provided in ZINP. Candidate status for
MP or his representative does not require the presence of

a certain social attribute specified in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution,
nor is it characterized by such a feature.

There is no constitutional prohibition on restricting rights or on
granting privileges on grounds other than exhaustive
listed in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. In the reasons of the quoted
a decision of the Constitutional Court states:

"It is one of these and other cases explicitly mentioned in the Constitution
It is clear that restrictions on the rights and granting of privileges to
certain social groups is permissible under the Constitution. Must
emphasize, however, that in all these cases it is a question of
socially necessary restrictions on the rights or granting of
privileges of certain groups of citizens while maintaining the priority of
the principle of equality of all citizens before the law. Exactly and
comprehensive indication of the social characteristics which are the basis for
preventing restrictions on rights and granting privileges, f
guarantee against unjustified extension of the grounds for admission
restrictions on citizens' rights or privileges. "

It is indisputable that in the specific case the regulation in art. 53, para. 1 of
ZINP is socially necessary. It is a guarantee of freedom
exercise of active and passive suffrage.
The election campaign lasts 30 days (Article 54 of the Law on Public Procurement) and with a view to
the provision of art. 64, para. 3 of the Constitution this period can not
be arbitrarily extended by the legislator. Candidates for popular
representatives and their advocates have the opportunity to prepare
their participation in the elections and to conduct election campaigning only in
this period and within it they do not have the necessary time
to defend themselves against an unfounded> accusation.
Initiation of criminal proceedings or detention of
a candidate for a Member of Parliament or his / her deputy will be harmed by
irreparable way their rights as it may frustrate their participation
in the election, to impede the election of the candidate and to influence
election results, discrediting voters as well
the candidate for MP, and the political force that

he represents. Even after that, the criminal case is terminated
proceedings and drop the charges, it will not
led to a change in the election results and the vote will not be resumed
to the voters as he really would be.
The probability of the occurrence of a similar hypothesis in the process of
formation of the legislature requires the legislator to take
measures to prevent factors external to the electoral process and
circumstances to influence the> free exercise of
suffrage and, as a consequence, lead to a change in
election results.

The perception of the above gives grounds to
concluded that Art. 53, para. 1 of ZINP does not contradict art. 6, para. 2 of
The Constitution, on the one hand, does not establish a privilege,
based on one of the social features mentioned in the text, and on the other
party, the established privilege is socially necessary.

From the systematic place of the texts in the Constitution, which
establish restrictions on the criminal liability of borrowers
certain positions, it can be concluded that they do not exhaust
constitutionally> admissible> possibilities for> restriction of
criminal liability. The regulation of these restrictions is contained in
The Constitution, as they are part of the statute of the Constitution
the relevant authority. This conclusion is supported by the fact that in the beginning
the overall regulation of the conditions for the occurrence of criminal
responsibility for the order of its implementation, including the matter
on criminally responsible persons and hypotheses of release from
criminal liability is contained in legislative acts -
The Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. "IN
The constitution lacks an explicit provision on immunity from criminal law
responsibility as a separate legal institution with a certain content,
applicable only to certain persons. The provisions of Art.
69 and Art. 70, Art. 103, para. You 4 and Art. 132, para. 1 regulate the status of
Members of Parliament, the President and the Vice-President and the Judges,
prosecutors and investigators, part of which is the criminal

irresponsibility and criminal inviolability to the extent provided for in
the relevant texts. The constitutional principle of equality of
citizens is regulated in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, included in Chapter
first - Basic principles. The constitutional obligation to surrender
anyone accused of a crime of the judiciary is in Art. 31, para. 1,
included in Chapter Two - Fundamental Rights and Obligations of Citizens. A
the regulation which establishes restrictions in the criminal liability for
persons holding certain positions is not in Chapter One as
constitutionally regulated exception to the general principle of Art. 6, para. 2
(regardless of the social feature on which it is established), nor is it in the chapter
second as a constitutionally regulated exception to Art. 31, para. 1. The regulation
it is not unified and summarized as a separate legal institution, but is
included respectively in Chapter Three - National Assembly, Chapter Four -
President of the Republic and Chapter Six - Judiciary. In that
position of the interpretation of the texts in view of their systematic
place in the Constitution imposes the conclusion that the constitutional legislator
it has not set itself the objective of settling exhaustively the cases in which it is
admissible limitation of criminal liability, and has settled
such cases within the framework of the status of the relevant state bodies.
This means that there is no prohibition by law to establish themselves
restrictions on criminal liability, if these restrictions do not
contradict constitutional principles or texts.

There is no contradiction between Art. 31, para. 1 of the Constitution and Art.
53, para. 1 of the ZINP. According to the constitutional text, everyone accused of
crime must be handed over to the judiciary legally
defined term. In the case of Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP, limiting
the criminal “responsibility of> those registered for> participation in
parliamentary elections candidates and their proxies for the time
of the election campaign, sets another, also legal term, although
different from the general one, for their transfer to the judiciary.
Therefore, the text does not block the possibility of forming
criminal proceedings and does not> exclude the implementation of
criminal liability.

Sped as limiting the criminal liability of
the candidates for MPs and their deputies for
campaign time is not a privilege based on
social feature referred to in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, and no
contradiction between art. 53, para. 1 of - ZINP and other constitutional text
or principle, there is no constitutional obstacle by law to be established
such restrictions and Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP does not contradict
The Constitution.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the Chief
Prosecutor of the Republic of Bulgaria for establishing
the unconstitutionality of Art. 53, para. 1 of the Law on Election of
MPs is unfounded and should be rejected.
OPINION

of the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation
on constitutional case Xe 12/2001

formed at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria
to declare the provision unconstitutional
of Art. 53 para. | of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament

The Constitutional Court allowed the request to be considered on the merits
of the Prosecutor General of> the Republic of Bulgaria for the establishment of
the unconstitutionality of Art. 53 para. | of the Law on the Election of People's
representatives, which reads:

Art. 53. (1) During the election campaign the registered
candidates for MPs and advocates cannot be
detained and prosecuted except in cases of
a serious crime.

1. Regarding the compliance of art. 53 of ZINP with art. 6 of the Constitution

The request of the Chief Prosecutor of the Republic maintains that Article 53, paragraph 1
from ZINP provides to the candidates for MPs and theirs
advocates a privilege that contradicts the principle of equality of
citizens before the law enshrined in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

ъ and ъ. pa za nstvo zabt
imitation and privileges under Art. 6 0: niation of the Republic of Bulgaria

The Basic Law explicitly defines (and restrictively) the powers of
state institutions and guarantees the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens.
The principle of constitutionalism is that with regard to rights provisions
of the Constitution can not be interpreted restrictively, and that no
prevents the content of the rights provided for therein from being extended by
law.

In its meaning, logical interpretation and systematic place, the text of Art. 6 from
The constitution guarantees citizens their equality, on the other hand
proclaims the obligation of the state to provide them with equal protection from
the law and equal guarantees for the exercise of their rights and freedoms; and
notwithstanding the differences referred to in the second paragraph of Art. 6. This principle
is the basis of the legal order of any democratic society.

 

to the UN! and and the European. convention.

In international human rights instruments, as well as in practice
in their application, the concepts of equality and discrimination consistently and
are invariably interpreted as prohibiting an unjustified difference in
the treatment of individuals, not as a prohibition of any difference. IN
the practice of the European Court of Human Rights under Art. 14 of the ECHR is
adopted the principle that a breach of the principle of equality and
discrimination occurs when: there is a different attitude towards the same
cases - without objective and reasonable justification, or if missing
proportionality between the objective pursued and the means employed.

3. Regarding the compliance of art. 53 para. | ZINP with the principle of
equal responsibility of citizens before the criminal law.

In essence, the request alleges that Art. 6 of the Constitution, requires
guarantees of equal opportunity for the exercise of the powers of
the bodies of the judiciary to all citizens, as well as the same
an obligation to bear criminal responsibility and to endure what was imposed on them
punishment determined in accordance with the same procedural order.

The interpretation of the content of Art. 6 as an obligation and not as a right,
means to accept that the Constitution does not provide equal and equal
guarantees for the rights of citizens and does not limit the powers
of the authorities, and vice versa - that it unconditionally guarantees the powers of
institutions and restrictively defines the rights of individuals.

Both the electoral law and other basic laws of Bulgaria
provide for a number of limitations on the powers of the institutions,
exercising criminal responsibility and balancing them with a view to protection
of other public interests and individual rights, creating temporary
or permanent legal exceptions to the principle of the same obligation.

Incorrect in the request is maintained that the exceptions to the principle that
"All citizens are equal before the law, including the criminal law
law ”are provided only in the Constitution and cannot be
created in other laws. In defense of other public interests and principles
of Justice PPC and Penal Code provide for well-known differences in
the realization of the responsibility of the citizens before the law, which are also not
explicitly provided for in the Constitution: not subject to criminal prosecution
minors and the insane, minors are liable before the law at
relaxed conditions, pending criminal proceedings against sudden and severe
sick people are stopped, etc. These "privileges" are undoubtedly created
namely with a view to protecting the public guaranteed by the basic law
interests and rights (as is the right to fair and free elections) and hardly
there is a dispute over their constitutionality.

At the same time, as far as the disputed and other texts of the ZINP
provide some additional rights during the election campaign,
guarantees and privileges of the candidates for Members of Parliament and theirs
advocates, in the light of the generally accepted interpretation of the concept
"privilege"? and “non-discrimination”, the legislator can justify
their different treatment with the need to ensure equal opportunity
for the exercise of their direct and equal suffrage and in defense of
the public interest in holding free and democratic elections.

For these reasons, the thesis that any unforeseen in the Constitution
exception, or a special guarantee against criminal prosecution
constitutes an unconstitutional privilege is unfounded, and created
art. 53 para. | from ZINP additional guarantees do not contradict the requirement
of Art. 6 for equality and non-discrimination.

P. As to whether the provision of Article 5 applies
echk: 0 establishment of criminal liability

The Prosecutor General's request further stated that “specific
expression of ... the most common? principle (of equality of citizens before
law) in the field of criminal law are the following provisions of
The Constitution:

a / All persons who have committed a crime are attracted to
criminal liability. / argument from art. 127, item 1 of the Constitution ”,
which reads: “The prosecutor's office monitors compliance with the law by attracting
to responsibility the persons who have committed a crime and maintains
the charge in criminal cases of a general nature. "

as well as the text of Art. ЗГал. | of the Constitution:

6 / “Everyone accused of a crime should be handed over to the judiciary
".. within the legally prescribed period" in order to seek criminal liability,
according to the order determined in the Code of Criminal Procedure ”.

First of all, we are not convinced of the admissibility of deriving
"Provisions of the Constitution" in the way of the argument, as well as its interpretation
from institutions other than the Constitutional Court. At the same time, we believe that
on the above considerations regarding the meaning and content of Art. 6,
the principle derived by the applicant 's argument does not correspond to the meaning of
The Constitution.

As Art. 6, as well as the cited text of art. 31 of the Constitution, are
created as guarantees for the rights of citizens against possible arbitrariness,
and not as a constitutional protection of the powers and obligations of the bodies
of the judiciary to carry out criminal proceedings. Art. 31 para. 1 /
it does not refer to the right but to the obligation of the authorities to extradite the arrested person
of a body of the judiciary to rule on the need for
his detention. The text is designed to protect the right to personal liberty and
security - as a guarantee of citizens against arbitrary, illegal or
unnecessary arrests and not to ensure in all cases the detention of
the accused.

However, the interim protection created by the contested text
candidates and their advocates does not release them from their liability to
the law and does not impede the ability of the prosecution to exercise
its powers in relation to the exercise of this responsibility.
The impugned text allows for the possibility of criminal proceedings
production in the presence of sufficient data, as well as the performance of
investigative actions during the election campaign. The provision
postpones by about one month the moment of the defendant's confrontation with
the judiciary to determine the need for his detention, or for
bringing him to criminal responsibility.

It is well known that outside the statute of limitations for prosecution of one
crime, the law does not provide a mandatory period in which the state

authorities should also prosecute a person with a view to
the usual time limits for the completion of preliminary proceedings in
country, the restriction period of about one month is unlikely to affect
significantly on the duration of criminal proceedings. Here
why, we consider that the request unreasonably states that “in practice this
an unconstitutional norm can seriously impede criminal punishment
prosecution of perpetrators of crimes, including serious ones
crimes ”.

For these reasons, we believe that the text of Art. 53 of the ZINP does not create.
permanent obstacles to the administration of justice, nor does it contradict
in any way the texts of the Constitution referred to in the request -
provided for in it explicitly, or based on arguments presented by the Prosecutor General.

1 tn: the lie of the state to ax! and conditions
guarantees for free and fair elections

As the norm of Art. 53 para. | of the ZINP, as well as other provisions of
the law aims to create not inadmissible privileges, but the necessary conditions
and institutional guarantees to protect the public interest from
the production of free and fair elections on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage
suffrage by secret ballot. " / чп.10/. In Decision Xe 8 of 3 May 2001
of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria under cd. On October 10, 2001, the Constitutional Court ruled that although
"The constitution (yes! Does not mention that elections should be free and
honest ... there is hardly any doubt that the last two requirements are internal
inherent qualities of general elections. "

The need for free and fair elections is
proclaimed in the main international documents - the Universal Declaration on
human rights (Article 21), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
rights (art. 25), the European Convention on Human Rights (art. 3 of
Additional Protocol). The text of the ECHR is explicitly worded as
positive obligation of the state. In its decision of 2 March 1987 in the case
Ma ei-Movsh apd Setzau, the European Court of Human Rights
stated that “the main obligation in this area is not to abstain or
non-interference, as in most civil and political rights, and for
taking positive measures by the state for
the production of democratic elections. "

The conclusion of the Constitutional Court in Decision Ho 8 of
May 3, 2001 under cd. G 10/2001: “... for the state it exists explicitly
obligation and not the right to produce or not to hold elections in that manner. " This
obligation includes the creation of conditions for the conduct of fair and
fair elections and the guarantee of fundamental rights proclaimed in itself.
constitution. The exercise of active and passive suffrage,
the right to freedom of expression during elections, the right to
information, the right to free association, etc. have real value only
in the presence of relevant guarantees, one of which is the disputed norm.

Art. 53 para. | is not the only additional and special guarantee for
the holding of fair and free elections provided for in the current legislation
legislation. The law on the election of MPs gives to
candidates for MPs the capacity of officials within the meaning
of the Penal Code, parties and candidates for MPs receive a special
privileged status in terms of their appearances in national and others
electronic media, an obligation is created for equal publication of
free response in case of infringement of the rights and good name of a candidate in
daily or periodical, etc. These rules are conditions and guarantees,
inherent and necessary for a free and democratic electoral process, c
which individual candidates receive the opportunity freely and without availability
of any pressure to participate, voters - the right to exercise
informed and free choice.

The temporary restriction created by the norm of Article 53 para 1 of the ZINP
prevents the possible use of the possibility of criminal
persecution and especially for the detention of candidates for Members of Parliament
for purposes other than those under the PPC. With it, the legislator creates a guarantee for
the non-interference of a state body - the prosecution - in the elections and
prevents the possibility for the judiciary to influence
elections by exercising their powers on a political basis.

In view of the powers of the judiciary in the existing
legislation, art. 53 para. | guarantees both applicants and
voters that none of the contestants will be
persecuted for political reasons or disadvantaged

the other participants - in contradiction with the requirements of the Constitution for
khan, tite and exhaustive restrictions on them.

According to Art. 65 para. | of the Constitution, ”for a Member of Parliament may
to elect a Bulgarian citizen who has no other citizenship,
he has reached the age of 21, has not been placed under guardianship and is not serving a sentence
imprisonment."

The text of Art. 65 cannot be interpreted broadly and not
provides for additional restrictions for suspected persons,
or criminal proceedings instituted. Moreover, since Art. 31 para. 4 of
The Constitution requires that “restrictions on the rights of
the accused in excess of what is necessary for the administration of justice ”,
taken together, the two texts should mean that even at the time of
the opening of the> election campaign to exist formed
criminal proceedings against persons registered as candidates for.
MPs, their detention or prosecution
liability would not be constitutional - if it goes beyond what is necessary
for the administration of justice.

Axis for equal rights of candidates.

It is common ground that, in the absence of the contested text, the rights of
possibly detained or prosecuted
candidates for MPs and their advocates would be
significantly limited and different from the rights and opportunities of others
candidates. Thus, the absence of the contested text would create
additionally - not provided for in the Constitution. restriction of the right of
Bulgarian citizens to be elected. Although it does not create an absolute
prohibition on the participation of the applicant or his representative, detention, or
bringing them to justice during the campaign, or
even the theoretical possibility of this can obviously be an obstacle to
equal exercise of the right to participate in elections.

It should not be forgotten that although all citizens respond equally
before the law, the current Code of Criminal Procedure does not contain
guarantees against the possible selective exercise of the powers of
the judicial authorities in instituting criminal proceedings; and
bringing to justice. In the conditions of elections, this possibility contains
and a theoretical risk of persecution of political opponents and unwanted
competitors through the means of criminal justice. This risk should
be avoided in order to ensure genuinely equal participation of
representatives of various political formations and independent candidates in
elections.

Nedo: acceptable participation of the bodies of the judiciary in the elections

The possibility of detention and prosecution
also contains a risk of inadmissible participation of the judiciary in
elections that would run counter to the principle of separation of powers,
as well as the requirement for non - interference of the acting authorities in
the election of a legislature. To ensure the effective separation of
authorities and their mutual balancing, during free elections for
the legislature, the democratic state owes its citizens
freedom from pressure and influence from both the executive and
by the judiciary. Although not specified in the Constitution, this
requirement stems from the principles of free choice and the obligation of
the state to create conditions for them.

Guarantees for the free will of the voters

Free elections mean an authentic correspondence between the will of
voters and election results, which implies freedom from
any pressure that could change the will of the voter.
The text is also designed to ensure the expression of freedom and influence
opinion and will of both the candidates and their advocates and
the voters themselves.

It is indisputable that the detention, or attracting a candidate for the People's
representative to criminal liability during the election
campaign, may form Wu voter negative opinion, which is not
must comply with any future and final decision
of the court, which alone rules on the guilt of the accused.
This would run counter to the requirement of freedom from unjustified negativity
formation of the will of the voter through the means of the penal
justice, as well as the requirement to express candidates without fear of
repression.

At the same time, by its social effect the retention of candidates and
their prosecution would go beyond exhaustively
the restrictions on eligibility listed in the Constitution, which do not include
all "accused of crimes", but only "punishable" persons.

Conclusion

Undoubtedly, the request of the Prosecutor General raises the issue of
the necessary balance between the public interest in prosecuting
all perpetrators of crimes and the fundamental interest of
democratic society from the periodic conduct of fair and free
elections.

We consider that the disputed text of Art. 53 para. | of the Law on the Election of
MPs regulate precisely this balance, on the one hand
does not block the path to the administration of justice, but on the other hand guards in
the necessary degree of the rights and freedoms provided for in the Constitution
citizens by creating conditions for fair and free elections.
OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on

constitutional case Me 12 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

As of May 3, 2001, we have been constituted as
an interested party in the constitutional case Mo 12 for 2001,
formed at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria for
establishing the unconstitutionality of Art. 53, para. 1 of the Law on
election of MPs (ZINP).

The request states that Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP, according to which under
during the election campaign the registered candidates for the people
representatives and advocates may not be detained and
brought to criminal responsibility except in the cases of found
serious crime, contrary to the constitutional principle of
equality of citizens - Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria. It is maintained that the Constitution determines not only the basic
principle of equality of citizens, and all exceptions to it in
the field of criminal law.

The clarification of the compliance of art. 53, para. 1 of ZINP s
The Constitution as follows from the request of the Prosecutor General,
In our opinion, two main questions need to be answered:

- whether Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP creates privileges for individuals
citizens based on any of the social features specified in Art. 6,
al. 2 of the Constitution;

- whether the Constitution, regulating restrictions in criminal
liability of persons holding certain positions (Art. 69 and Art. 70,
Art. 103, para. Ti4 ichl. 132, para. 1) excludes the possibility of such a regulation
in respect of other persons to be contained in law.

As stated in the grounds of Decision Mo 14 of
The 1992 Constitutional Court in Constitutional Case No. 14 of 1992,
equality before the law means equality of all citizens
before the normative acts and obligation for their equal treatment by
state power. Article 6, para. 2 of the Constitution prohibits them to be
restrict rights or create privileges based on
race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion,
education, “beliefs, political affiliation, personal and
social status or property status. According to the same
decision of the Constitutional Court social signs of non-admission
restrictions on the rights or granting of privileges referred to in Art.
6, para. 2 are listed exhaustively.

It is not clear from the request which of the social features under Art. 6,
al. 2 is the basis of the privilege under Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP according to
the Attorney General. In our opinion, the special status of the registered persons
for participation in the elections as candidates for Members of Parliament and of
their advocates is not a privilege of a separate group of citizens,
based on some of those specified in Art. b, para. 2 of the Social Constitution
signs, but is a privilege established to ensure freedom
exercising the active and passive suffrage. Status of
candidate for MP can acquire anyone who
meets the conditions under Art. 65, para. 1 of the Constitution and is registered
for participation in the elections as a candidate for Member of Parliament. Status of
an advocate can also be acquired by any citizen who registers
under the conditions and by the order, provided in ZINP. Candidate status for
MP or his representative does not require the presence of

a certain social attribute specified in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution,
nor is it characterized by such a feature.

There is no constitutional prohibition on restricting rights or on
granting privileges on grounds other than exhaustive
listed in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. In the reasons of the quoted
a decision of the Constitutional Court states:

"It is one of these and other cases explicitly mentioned in the Constitution
It is clear that restrictions on the rights and granting of privileges to
certain social groups is permissible under the Constitution. Must
emphasize, however, that in all these cases it is a question of
socially necessary restrictions on the rights or granting of
privileges of certain groups of citizens while maintaining the priority of
the principle of equality of all citizens before the law. Exactly and
comprehensive indication of the social characteristics which are the basis for
preventing restrictions on rights and granting privileges, f
guarantee against unjustified extension of the grounds for admission
restrictions on citizens' rights or privileges. "

It is indisputable that in the specific case the regulation in art. 53, para. 1 of
ZINP is socially necessary. It is a guarantee of freedom
exercise of active and passive suffrage.
The election campaign lasts 30 days (Article 54 of the Law on Public Procurement) and with a view to
the provision of art. 64, para. 3 of the Constitution this period can not
be arbitrarily extended by the legislator. Candidates for popular
representatives and their advocates have the opportunity to prepare
their participation in the elections and to conduct election campaigning only in
this period and within it they do not have the necessary time
to defend themselves against an unfounded> accusation.
Initiation of criminal proceedings or detention of
a candidate for a Member of Parliament or his / her deputy will be harmed by
irreparable way their rights as it may frustrate their participation
in the election, to impede the election of the candidate and to influence
election results, discrediting voters as well
the candidate for MP, and the political force that

he represents. Even after that, the criminal case is terminated
proceedings and drop the charges, it will not
led to a change in the election results and the vote will not be resumed
to the voters as he really would be.
The probability of the occurrence of a similar hypothesis in the process of
formation of the legislature requires the legislator to take
measures to prevent factors external to the electoral process and
circumstances to influence the> free exercise of
suffrage and, as a consequence, lead to a change in
election results.

The perception of the above gives grounds to
concluded that Art. 53, para. 1 of ZINP does not contradict art. 6, para. 2 of
The Constitution, on the one hand, does not establish a privilege,
based on one of the social features mentioned in the text, and on the other
party, the established privilege is socially necessary.

From the systematic place of the texts in the Constitution, which
establish restrictions on the criminal liability of borrowers
certain positions, it can be concluded that they do not exhaust
constitutionally> admissible> possibilities for> restriction of
criminal liability. The regulation of these restrictions is contained in
The Constitution, as they are part of the statute of the Constitution
the relevant authority. This conclusion is supported by the fact that in the beginning
the overall regulation of the conditions for the occurrence of criminal
responsibility for the order of its implementation, including the matter
on criminally responsible persons and hypotheses of release from
criminal liability is contained in legislative acts -
The Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. "IN
The constitution lacks an explicit provision on immunity from criminal law
responsibility as a separate legal institution with a certain content,
applicable only to certain persons. The provisions of Art.
69 and Art. 70, Art. 103, para. You 4 and Art. 132, para. 1 regulate the status of
Members of Parliament, the President and the Vice-President and the Judges,
prosecutors and investigators, part of which is the criminal

irresponsibility and criminal inviolability to the extent provided for in
the relevant texts. The constitutional principle of equality of
citizens is regulated in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, included in Chapter
first - Basic principles. The constitutional obligation to surrender
anyone accused of a crime of the judiciary is in Art. 31, para. 1,
included in Chapter Two - Fundamental Rights and Obligations of Citizens. A
the regulation which establishes restrictions in the criminal liability for
persons holding certain positions is not in Chapter One as
constitutionally regulated exception to the general principle of Art. 6, para. 2
(regardless of the social feature on which it is established), nor is it in the chapter
second as a constitutionally regulated exception to Art. 31, para. 1. The regulation
it is not unified and summarized as a separate legal institution, but is
included respectively in Chapter Three - National Assembly, Chapter Four -
President of the Republic and Chapter Six - Judiciary. In that
position of the interpretation of the texts in view of their systematic
place in the Constitution imposes the conclusion that the constitutional legislator
it has not set itself the objective of settling exhaustively the cases in which it is
admissible limitation of criminal liability, and has settled
such cases within the framework of the status of the relevant state bodies.
This means that there is no prohibition by law to establish themselves
restrictions on criminal liability, if these restrictions do not
contradict constitutional principles or texts.

There is no contradiction between Art. 31, para. 1 of the Constitution and Art.
53, para. 1 of the ZINP. According to the constitutional text, everyone accused of
crime must be handed over to the judiciary legally
defined term. In the case of Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP, limiting
the criminal “responsibility of> those registered for> participation in
parliamentary elections candidates and their proxies for the time
of the election campaign, sets another, also legal term, although
different from the general one, for their transfer to the judiciary.
Therefore, the text does not block the possibility of forming
criminal proceedings and does not> exclude the implementation of
criminal liability.

Sped as limiting the criminal liability of
the candidates for MPs and their deputies for
campaign time is not a privilege based on
social feature referred to in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, and no
contradiction between art. 53, para. 1 of - ZINP and other constitutional text
or principle, there is no constitutional obstacle by law to be established
such restrictions and Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP does not contradict
The Constitution.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the Chief
Prosecutor of the Republic of Bulgaria for establishing
the unconstitutionality of Art. 53, para. 1 of the Law on Election of
MPs is unfounded and should be rejected.
OPINION

OF THE SUPREME COURT OF CASSATION
ON CONSTITUTIONAL CASE F 12/2001

DEAR PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In view of our constitution as an interested party and
given the opportunity to comment on the request of the Chief
prosecutor for establishing the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para from
The Law on the Election of Members of Parliament expresses the following
position:

The provision of art. 53, para of the Law on the Election of People's
representatives / SG, issue 37 of April 13, 2001 / is unconstitutional
for the following reasons:

1. The equality of all citizens before the law is
a constitutional principle that underlies the civil
society and the state. It is common to the whole legal system and
at the same time, it is a fundamental right of citizens.

The equality of the citizens before the law in the sense of art. B, para 2
of the Constitution means equality before all normative acts,
including before the criminal law.

Anyone who has committed a crime is attracted to
responsibility / art. 127 of the Constitution /.

Anyone charged with a crime should be handed over to
the judiciary within the legally determined term / art. 31 of the Constitution /.

2. Exceptions to the principle of equality of citizens before
the law is allowed at the constitutional level only on the basis of
specifically and exhaustively indicated features, different from those under Art. 6,
para 2 of the Constitution.

According to Article 69 of the Constitution, MPs do not
are criminally liable for the opinions expressed by them and for
the votes in the National Assembly, and according to Article 70 they cannot be
detained and no criminal prosecution may be instituted against them
except for serious crimes after prior permission from the People's
assembly or its chairman. With the immunity of the people
representatives are used according to Article 132 of the Constitution by judges,
prosecutors and investigators, and according to Article 103, paragraph 1, the President and
the Vice - President shall not be liable for acts performed under

performance of its functions, with the exception of treason and
violation of the Constitution.

It is inadmissible by law to provide them to individual groups
citizens certain privileges.

The admission on the grounds specified in Art. 6, para? from
The Constitution social signs or of others not specified in it
signs, “privileges for registered candidates for popular
representatives and their advocates during the election campaign,
is a violation of the principle of equality of all citizens before the law.

3. Suffrage is a political right. It is basic
regulated in the Constitution. Article 10 sets out the principles for
its exercise Article 42 specifies the conditions for
exercise of the active suffrage, and in art. 65 and 93 - the conditions for
exercising the passive suffrage for Members of Parliament,
president and vice president. It is inadmissible by law to limit them
or expand in the exercise of passive suffrage.

Only the organization and the order for are determined by law
conducting the election.

The status of citizens exercising actively and passively
suffrage is determined by the Constitution, which does not allow
restrictions or privileges in the rights of this category of citizens at
exercising their right to vote.

4. The provision of art. 53, para ZINP is not public
necessary for the free exercise of passive voting
right.

Compliance with regulations is a basic obligation of
all legal entities. The opposite understanding is absurd. Republic
Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law. It is governed by the Constitution and
the laws in the country / art. 4, para. of the Constitution / Regarding
suffrage the principle of legality is specified in
the provision of Article 167 of the Criminal Code, which provides
criminal liability for infringements of suffrage.
WRITTEN OPINION

of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee
on constitutional case 2/2001
concerning
request of a group (56) MPs from XXXUS National Assembly for
declaring the unconstitutionality of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (promulgated, SG No. 108 of December 29)
2000) and the same request made by a panel of the Third Division of
The Supreme Administrative Court.

Dear Constitutional Judges,

In connection with constitutional case 2/2001, instituted on 13 February
2001, Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, constituted as interested
party by Order of the Constitutional Court of 13 February 2001,
present this written opinion.

With the received request, made by a group of MPs,
disputes the constitutionality of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on
foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (hereinafter “Law on Interpretation”). IN
the request made by the group of MPs indicates that the People's
assembly has no right to give an authentic interpretation of its legislative
acts, and that the only article of the law in question contains a plurality
new substantive and procedural norms, which are also unconstitutional.
MPs also challenge the constitutionality of paragraph c
The law of interpretation, which determines its entry into force retroactively.

In the Supreme Division of the Supreme Court, filed by judges
administrative court request presented similar arguments to those of
MPs both in terms of the power of the People's
meeting to clarify with binding effect the exact meaning of
legal norms, as well as on the unconstitutionality of the provisions in
The law of interpretation.

This opinion consists of two parts. In its first part it will
the powers of the National Assembly to adopt shall be considered
interpretative laws, and the second part will deal in detail with Article and
paragraph 1 of the Law on Interpretation and its compliance with the Constitution.

1. On the authority of the National Assembly to adopt interpretatives
laws

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee is of the opinion that the National Assembly has
the power to adopt a binding interpretation of the laws it has adopted.
This power, although not explicitly stated in the Constitution,
derives from its provision in Article 84, according to which the People's
assembly adopts, amends, supplements and repeals laws. As a receiving body.
laws in the country under the Constitution, the National Assembly has the powers and

to clarify the meaning of the law in cases where there is a contradiction
interpretation of the law, or the National Assembly deems that such an interpretation is
imperative. The powers for this authentic interpretation by the People's
assembly derive directly from its powers to adopt and amend
legislation. Conversely, the possibility for the National Assembly to adopt,
amends and supplements the laws, but cannot by law clarify the meaning of
one law or another would be absurd. Just like the powers of the People's
assembly to amend and repeal legislation does not depend on the change in composition
of the National Assembly, and therefore its powers as mandatory
authentic interpretation also can not depend on changes in its composition.

Nor can it be assumed that the interpretation of legislation
The National Assembly goes beyond its competence under the Constitution and
illegally enters into the powers of the court. The interpretation of the law by the court is
admissible only in the light of the hypotheses of the particular legal dispute,
considered by the court, and when there is a conflict between legal
provisions or in cases where interpretation is required in order to achieve
correspondence between a legal provision and a norm of a higher order. There is no court
general competence to interpret the law as such, regardless of the individual
legal dispute, and has only the general competence to apply and interpret
the law in the context of individual disputes. The lack of such a common
jurisdiction of the court to interpret the law as such is what the logic of
The constitution separates the court from the legislature. The National Assembly of its own
party is not limited by such requirements, and may accept an interpretation of
current legislation and on the basis of its own assessment of
appropriateness of such an interpretation in the same way as it may amend
or repeal legislation.

At the same time, the arguments set out in the request are inadmissible
entering into the prerogatives of the court in the adoption of the Law on Interpretation
raise an extremely complex issue of constitutional theory and
practice. This question is far from being just a matter of interpretation
laws adopted by the legislator, and is equally applicable to
of laws amending and repealing legislation. This is the question for.
legislation aimed at resolving specific disputes, which would already
constituted a seizure of the constitutional powers of the court.

According to the theory of the constitutional separation of powers,
the legislature in adopting legislation should be guided by
general considerations for the best regulation of the relevant public
relationships. It is inadmissible for the legislator to aim at the resolution of a specific,
individual case, through the adoption of legislation. In the same
time it is extremely difficult to find an exact constitutional criterion,
according to which to assess the deviation of the legislator from the obligation
its not to adopt legislation to address specific individual
disputes. Such a criterion will inevitably have to include an assessment of
the reasons of the legislator in the adoption of specific legislation and
the extent to which the legislation adopted has general applicability or is applicable to
relation only to an individual dispute. Adopted by the National Assembly
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Aliens Act basically reaffirms
long practice of the Bulgarian courts, indications for change of
which have appeared only recently. Therefore, despite the fact that
The law on interpretation was adopted on a specific occasion, the thesis that it aims

the resolution of an individual dispute, although for some reason, cannot
to be accepted as strictly justified.

P. Under Article 1 of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Aliens Act c
Republic of Bulgaria

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee considers that Article of the Law on the Interpretation of
Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria is unconstitutional
on the same grounds as is contrary to the Constitution and Article 47 itself
of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (hereinafter “LFRB”). The law for
interpretation reaffirms the main elements of the provision of Art. 47, as
excludes judicial control over administrative acts by which they may
fundamental rights are affected. This opinion refers to
the arguments set out in the opinion of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee on
constitutional case Ho 15 of 2000, at the same time setting out below
and some additional arguments regarding the individual provisions in Article
1 of the Interpretation Act.

First, the provision referred to in the second sentence of Article Ge
unconstitutional as it is contrary to the rights of the defense and
judicial control over the acts of administration.

According to Article 56 of the Constitution, every citizen has the right to
protection when his rights or legal rights are violated or threatened
interests. The Constitutional Court treats the right to defense as “one of
fundamental constitutional rights, which is of particular importance in
the democratic rule of law ”. In another decision, the Constitutional
The Court notes that “the right to a defense may take various forms, c
including explanations and hearings of citizens whose rights and legal
interests are threatened by various state bodies and institutions ”

The right to protection is guaranteed by the Constitution and by the provisions of Art
Art. 120 legal possibility to appeal to the courts of all
administrative acts affecting them. The Constitutional Court considers that
“Through the judicial control it is specified in the field of the administrative
administration of justice the basic principle of the rights and legitimate interests of
citizens and legal entities The human rights protection function
the state in this case also limits the possible abuse of power by a party
of state bodies - a phenomenon common in developed countries.
constitutional democracy | ... | ” The Constitutional Court ruled that under
the meaning of Art. 120, para. 2 citizens and legal entities are "affected" and have
the right to appeal against an administrative act that violates or threatens
their rights or legitimate interests. Regarding the scope of the exception under Article
120, para. 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court held that in order not to be
meaningless the basic constitutional principle of judicial control over

administrative acts, “such exclusion (under Article 120, paragraph 2) is
inadmissible when fundamental constitutional rights are affected ”. ?

Article 1 excludes the possibility of judicial review of
the administrative acts imposing coercive measures and refusing
issuance of a visa under the FRBA, when the legal basis for this is the national one
security. In the general case, the exclusion of judicial review is admissible by
The Constitution. In decision Xe 5 of 1997 gpo cd. He25 of 1996 national
security is cited as an example of an exception under Article 120, para. 2. Undoubtedly
national security as a public value similar to the basic ones
constitutional rights of citizens are subject to protection by
The Constitution. The question is whether national security as constitutional
value can be determined by a higher order than the basic ones
constitutional rights of citizens and therefore deserves more
Protection.

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee considers that it cannot be defined as
correct the distinction between national security and the fundamental rights of
man on the basis of a hierarchical order, as well as the acceptance of such
order a priori. The constitution is a social contract of the people who are
partially renounced their independence and autonomy in favor of
exercising power for certain purposes, but have kept the rest under
the form of rights and freedoms vis-à-vis the authorities. Thus
The constitution is the guarantor of the protection of the people by the authorities. Acceptance
as a rule, that there are constitutional values ​​above the rights and
freedoms of individuals violates the essence of the Constitution as a guarantor of
citizens' rights. An assessment is required in each case for
the proportionality of the restrictions on the rights of individuals. Gazi judgment
it must answer how reasonable the restriction is and whether it exceeds it
the degree necessary to achieve in the specific case of the respective
legitimate aim.Only through this assessment can the protection of
the rights of every citizen in relation to the government.

On this basis, exclusion from judicial review is in violation of Article
56 of the Constitution, when the act affects a fundamental constitutional right.
As it excludes judicial review and in cases where this is inadmissible under
the force of art. 120 in connection with Art. 56 of the Constitution, this provision follows
to be declared unconstitutional.

On the other hand, the Law on Interpretation provides that “immediately
execution ”and deprives of the right to appeal against the administrative acts,
coercive measures, as well as visa refusals,
when these measures are related to national security, which ev
non-compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights.

The European Convention on Human Rights also sets
a requirement for an effective remedy at national level in cases

violation of the rights guaranteed by the Convention. The European Court of Justice
accepts that “the meaning of Article 13 is in the requirement in the domestic
legislation to provide for an appeal procedure under
The Convention. ” This production must at least ensure
consideration of the complaint for violation of the right under the Convention by a competent
national authority. In the case of Jackal v. The United Kingdom, where v
the applicant was deported on grounds of.
national security, the European Court of Justice has established itself
violation of Article 13 of the Convention due to the lack of an effective procedure
to appeal the expulsion. In its judgment in the Chahal case, the Court took into account,
that the requirement for effective protection raises a problem with the use of
classified material when considering national considerations
security. However, this does not mean that national authorities are exempted from
the obligation for effective control by the domestic courts, which decide to.
refer to considerations of national security and terrorism.With the Court
attaches great importance to the fact that in Canada with a developed effective form of
judicial review of cases of the same type with sufficient guarantees of preservation
the confidentiality of classified information.

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee also draws attention to
the explanatory report to Protocol He? of the European Convention, which
points out that its provisions are in addition to those already in force
guarantees under Art. Article 3 8 in conjunction with Article 13.

Secondly, depriving the court of the opportunity to collect
evidence of the facts and circumstances motivating the issuing authority
the order. Prohibition to collect evidence is in contradiction with Art. 8 and Art.
121, para. 2 of the Constitution.

The deprivation of the court of the opportunity to collect evidence is c
contrary to Article 8 of the Constitution, as it limits the balance between
the individual authorities by the irrebuttable presumption that the authority which issued the act,
has always acted lawfully. The latter provides formal evidence
force of the opinion of the administrative body. The probative value is
formal, as it presupposes only the existence of an opinion that taken
coercive measure is directly related to national security.
Obviously, there is a precedent in the Bulgarian legislation against which
official documents (including administrative acts) have
formal probative force only in respect of being
the statement materialized in them has been made and that it comes from the person
signed the document as its publisher. An irrebuttable presumption is created that
the administrative body (in this case the Minister of the Interior or
authorized person), never makes a mistake in cases where a person must.

be expelled or denied a visa on the grounds
national security. There is an unjustified approach to the legality of
the acts of the administration. Formal probative value of the allegations in
certain administrative acts cannot be granted to any
public authority because there is a possibility of arbitrariness on its part,
which reflects on the rights of citizens. !?

On the other hand, the prohibition in question violates the constitutional
the guaranteed principle for the establishment in judicial proceedings of
the truth. The truth is sought through the evidence and therefore through the prohibition
the courts would not be able to rule on their collection
correct solution. The violation of the principle of establishing the truth is
always related to a procedural violation and is grounds for annulment of
the judgment or sentence. No truth about the circumstances of the case
individual processes can perform their tasks.

Thirdly, the annulment of the judicial acts issued
on an appeal against an order issued on the grounds of Art. 40, para. 1, item 2 in connection with
Art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, v. Goth
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria contradicts the principle of
separation of powers.

According to Article 117 in connection with the principle of separation of powers
the judiciary protects the rights and legitimate interests of citizens,
legal entities and the state. This means that the courts have
general judicial power in civil, administrative and criminal matters
affairs. This general judicial power also includes the power to be
considered all appeals brought before the court. Therefore they cannot
be null and void, but only inadmissible judgments in cases assigned to
non-judicial bodies. ? Although vicious, they are real and give rise to all
inherent legal consequences of the decision. These decisions are subject to
invalidation by way of appeal by means of an appeal by the party concerned, or
protest of the prosecutor. Only the appellate court is the one that should be
rule on the viciousness of judicial acts. The announcement with a normative act
of court decisions for vicious and the declaration of their nullity is
constitutes an interference with the powers of the judiciary.
OPINION

of the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation
on constitutional case He 2/2001

The Constitutional Court has admitted for consideration on the merits the request of
a group (56) of MPs from the XXXUP National Assembly, as well as
the request of a panel of judges of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court
for declaring unconstitutionality of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (promulgated SG No. 108/2000), which
reads:

The only member. They are not subject to appeal, do not contain factual grounds and
the orders issued on the grounds of art. 40, para. 1, item 2 in
connection with art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, item D of the Law on
foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria who impose coercive administrative measures,
directly related to the security of the country. The judgment of the court whether given
administrative act is directly related to the security of the country, is exhausted
only with the legal basis for its issuance specified in the order. That means the court
cannot consider appeals against such orders and they are left without consideration of
grounds of art. 20, para. 1, item 5 of the Law on the Supreme Administrative Court or on the grounds of Art.
34, item Gi4 of the Administrative Procedure Act. The court cannot collect
evidence of the facts and circumstances that motivated the authority that issued the order. IN
in cases where a hearing is allowed, the court is obliged to terminate the proceedings.
Judicial act on the merits, ruled on an appeal against an order issued on the basis of Art. 40,
al. 1, item 2 in connection with Art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, item 1
of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, is null and void and does not give rise to legal consequences.

FINAL PROVISION
Paragraph only. This law of interpretation has effect from entry
in force of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria.

1. To what extent is admission admissible and in accordance with the Constitution?
of an interpretative law retroactively by the National Assembly

1. Each legislative power has the main function to adopt, amend, supplement
and repeals laws. It also includes the possibility of an authentic interpretation of
the content of the will of the legislator by himself. The Constitutional Court
he has already found some of the norms discussed to be "interpretive" without them being
explicitly called so by the legislator himself.

Because the interpretative acts specify the original will of
the legislator, in theory it is assumed that any interpretive law has the opposite
action - it acts from the moment of adoption of the interpreted norm.

2. This does not mean that the retroactive effect of an interpretive law can be
revoked, or negatively affected already granted rights, to be sanctioned ex rose!
Tasso behavior, or to eliminate the consequences of the provisions of
the force of the initially adopted norm and entered into force decisions of
the courts. Such a possibility would mean a lack of legality and would
made the very existence of the judiciary meaningless.

Conversely, constitutional theory and its principles allow for interpretation
acts retroactively only in so far as they analyze the content of
existing norm without extending its effect to the detriment of the rights and
without prejudice to acts enacted in accordance with the law. It is this way because

the basic principles of constitutionalism - separation of powers, security and
guarantees of fundamental rights, the rule of law and legal stability,
are a higher principle of constitutionalism than one that allows
the authoritative retroactive interpretation of a normative act.

3. In the constitutional theory and practice it is accepted “(that
constitutionally retroactive laws may be enacted
only in so far as they improve rather than worsen the legal position of persons,
whose individual rights are affected - such as amnesty, decriminalization
of acts, etc. The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria provides for a prohibition
for retroactive effect only of criminal laws, where this principle is
conducted to the end. This does not mean that the retroactive infringement of the rights of
citizens is possible, but is an indication that the legislator did not consider
necessary to express explicitly this principle of constitutionalism, since
it is fundamental and implied in every state governed by the rule of law. Prohibition of reverse
effect of norms that negatively affect the legal status of the person or
creates or aggravates its liability, is explicitly provided for in the recent
the adopted constitutions of the newly formed Central Asian states. In the article
149 of the Constitution of Azerbaijan reads: "The normative acts,
improving the legal status of the natural and legal person,
revoking or mitigating his legal liability may have the opposite effect
force ... Other normative acts have no retroactive force ". The same principle applies
it also contains in the constitutions of Kazakhstan / art. 77, para 5 / and Georgia / art. 42, para 5 /.

4. On the other hand, from the reasons to the law it is clear that the will of
the legislator was not only to specify the content of the adopted norm of Art.
47, but also to give instructions to the courts in the country regarding its uniformity
interpretation and application - a power provided by the Constitution
only in court.

Q. To what extent is an interpretation admissible and in accordance with the Constitution?
of a law by the National Assembly regarding the manner of its implementation
from the courts

1. The authoritative interpretation of the legislator's own will for
the content of the norm should be distinguished from the interpretation of
the exact and uniform application of the law provided by the constitution
only in the courts. In the decision of Jo 27/98 on cd. 20/98,
The Constitutional Court has expressed the opinion that: “like the Supreme Court of Cassation
court and the Supreme Administrative Court carry out their
powers under Art. 124 and Art. 125 of the Constitution primarily through its
interpretive activity. "

Art. 124. The Supreme Court of Cassation shall exercise supreme judicial supervision over
accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts.

Art. 125. (1) The Supreme Administrative Court shall exercise supreme judicial
supervision of the accurate and uniform application of the laws in the administrative
justice.

For the stated reasons, we believe that the National Assembly can accept
retroactive laws of an interpretative nature, insofar as they clarify
the early expressed will of the legislator and are not further limited ex roBg
Tasso rights of individuals. As for the interpretation of the law on
its exact and uniform application by the courts, this function is assigned by
the constitution of the judiciary, not the legislature.

2. The motives to the Law for the interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA explicitly state that
The National Assembly considers it necessary to interpret the law instead of the courts
- precisely as regards its precise and uniform application by them. The motives
of the petitioners analyze the judicial activity and the content itself
of the law constitutes direct instructions to the courts as to how
law enforcement. In addition to the seizure of these constitutionally
regulated functions, the Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 ZCHRB directly
disposes of acts issued by the courts, explicitly takes away
the powers of the court to rule on the admissibility of pending and future
disputes, and directly orders the termination of accepted for consideration by the court
disputes.

3. Neither the guarantees of rights nor the balance of power could
exist if parliament has the opportunity to intervene directly in
the work of the judiciary by annulling issued judicial acts. From one
side, this makes the existence of the judiciary itself meaningless by taking away
essential element of it - to bind the parties to the dispute with the consequences of
a final decision and oblige the other persons to comply with
this decision. On the other hand, if such interference is allowed, it would be
affect the rights which the parties bound by the decision in question
acquire, and in principle would, to the greatest extent, damage the confidence of
citizens in justice and the existence of the rule of law.

4. In the present case, breach of the principle of separation of powers, a
hence the contradiction with the Constitution and its basic principles, the
in the first place is the deprivation of judgments of
the finality they had after their entry into force. It is introduced
a precedent by which one came into force and produced legal consequences
a judicial act may be corrected by an act of the legislature and on its own
discretion. This contradicts the principle of separation of powers and is not
known in world constitutionalism.

5. The legislature has the power to prescribe rules for
behavior that should be observed by every citizen, but
the power to interpret and apply these rules in each
a specific case is part of the judicial activity. With the CA a whole group
judicial acts, which have already given rise to rights and obligations for the parties to them, are
declare null and void. At the same time, the law gives direct instructions to
courts how to hear cases, ie. the essential element of
the administration of justice, namely the right of the court to assess the facts and the right to
own independent discretion.

The inadmissibility of such interference was emphasized at the outset
the development of scientific political and constitutional thought. Alexander
Hamilton points out that “neither the British nor the constitutions of the individual
States allow a judgment to be reviewed or
decided by an act of the legislature ”The Great American
constitutionalist Thomas Cowley posed this very problem
in 1868:

"If the legislator cannot exercise any indirectness
control over the courts, requiring them to interpret and
apply the law according to his own point of view, it is obvious that
nor can it do so directly by rejecting their decisions,
forcing them to start new processes, ordering them to justify
violators of the law or ordering them what specific steps to take
undertake in the course of a court hearing ”.

6. The relationship between the legislature and the judiciary in
the constitutional history of the United States, in our view, largely shows
the importance of the principle and its development over the last 200 years.
Fundamental to clarify and apply the principle of division of
authorities is the decision of 1803. in the case of Marbury v. Madison (Magriu W.
Madwop) of the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled that every court has
the right and obligation to invalidate and annul legislation that is
incompatible with the interpretation of the Constitution given by the Supreme Court. IN
the decision states that “it is certainly in the competence and in the obligations
of the judiciary to say what the law contains (10 zauta! Me du, 15) ”.

Further in the same decision states that those who apply a rule
in relation to specific cases, they must necessarily interpret and clarify
this rule. In the case of Cooper v. Aaron (Sooreg v. Aagop) of 1958, he says that
"The judiciary is supreme in its interpretation
the content of the Constitution and the laws ”...“ Any other conclusion
would be contrary to the basic concept of the separation of powers and
the balance resulting from the scheme of this principle ”. (Opied Bumez u. Mkop -
1974). As for legislation affecting judicial decisions
acts, in the case SShsaro 8. Boshchet Ap ez, ps. y. Maepiap 8. 5. Sogr. 1948 is said to
“Decisions that are made within the powers that
the constitution, given to the courts, cannot be legally reviewed,
cancel or deny their legal significance by any party
by the other authorities in the state ”, as he claims“ ... no court decision in
The United States may not, under any circumstances, be subject to review, and
even of repeal, by the legislature, in whose hands as under
it seems that no judicial power of any kind has been given ”.
LNaurstz Saze, 1792 "... the acts of the Congress cannot have for
resulting in the annulment of a judgment which has already been given,
or the rights defined by it ... This is a principled position that cannot
to be denied - especially when it comes to a decision related to personal
rights of the parties to the case. When the decision has already been made, the right
becomes absolutely ... Reppzu! UUpeiter in: Veto Vpee So., 1856 /

 

7. The principle that retroactive legislation is an exception to the general
rule that laws have no retroactive effect has its deeper
argumentation in the principle of legality and justice, which command to
everything legally performed under the action of the old one remains in force
law. "Whoever violates the principle that laws have no retroactive effect,
it actually violates the people's sense of legal security ”(Tseko
Bags; "General Theory of Law and the State", Sofia, 1992, p.389).

The protection of the prerogatives of the judiciary and its independence from
the legislative against the retroactive effect of the laws is clearly manifested and
in the decision of the US Air Force in the case Plot / Mash y. Zrepf pl Vagt, ts.1995 /
It examines an attempt by Congress to declare invalid final entries
in force court decisions and order the courts to resume consideration of
closed cases with final decisions through retroactive legislation.
The US Air Force has declared the law unconstitutional because it violates it.
the principles of separation of powers. “A final decision of
the judiciary must be, in practice, so is any attempt by
the legislator to change this situation is an interference in power,
which is explicitly given to the judicial authorities ”.

8. For these reasons we consider that the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 ZCHRB
contradicts the principle of separation of powers, which is a fundamental principle
of the Bulgarian state, reflected in Art. 8 of the Constitution ..

Sh. To what extent the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA is valid
interpretative and admissible from the Constitution given by it
interpretation

1. In the requests for declaring unconstitutionality of the discussed law
contains allegations that it is given back by an interpretive law
effect of new substantive and procedural norms to the detriment of basic
rights.

2. Part of the discussed law interprets the provision of art. 47 ZCHRB c
the frameworks permitted by the principles of the constitution and the rule of law.
The interpretative law explicitly limits the scope of art. 47 to
“The orders issued on the grounds of art. 40 para. 1 item 2 in connection with Art. 10 para. 1
item You art. 42, or on the grounds of art. 10 para. 1 item 1 of the FRBA ”, in which exactly
indicate substantive grounds related to national security.
Thus, the application of Art. 47 in relation to the others
measures provided for in Chapter Five of the FRBA.

3. The only logical and constitutional interpretation of the applied one
field of art. 47 of the FRBA is the restrictive - reducing provided in the text
of Art. 47 line only to cases directly related to the security of
the country. By the way, in most cases the courts have applied Art. 47 exactly
and before the adoption of the Law on its interpretation.

Insofar as this part of the law is interpreted restrictively, the field of Art.
47 of the LFRB, do not encroach on the excavation: Easgo of existing rights, but on the contrary - explicitly

”

the will of the legislator to prevent its expansion is specified
application to the detriment of the rights and interests of the persons concerned.

4. With the request for declaring unconstitutionality of the Interpretative
law disputes the possibility of decisions of the administration - to refuse
from issuing a visa under Art. 10 para. 1 item 1, to be included in the application
field of art. 47, which referred only to “orders under this section”. It is said,
that the interpretative law expands the scope of art. 47. Immigration
each country's policy is a domestic policy issue and decisions to give
or denial of access to its territory shall not be subject to appeal to a court
or otherwise in many democracies. At the same time, because
the persons concerned are not in the territory of the State, the refusal of access
it cannot in itself affect any rights. With herself
non-admission that State has refused to admit persons under its jurisdiction and
to grant and guarantee them any rights. For the same reason
such refusals are not subject to control under the ZAP in principle, as c
they cannot be affected by the individual rights granted. That's why,
we consider that the inclusion of the decisions for refusal of visa on the grounds of art. 10
al. 1 item 1 in the field of application of Art. 47 of the FRBA, although unsuccessfully from
from the point of view of a systematic approach of the legislator can not be
subject to a dispute as to constitutionality.

5. Careful reading of the Law on Interpretation in its remaining part and of
the motives for it show that they do not narrow, but silently expand
the scope of art. 47 of the FRBA - regarding the interpretation of the concept
"Directly related to the security of the country" and the restriction of
the possibilities for any protection of the persons concerned. The dowry
by interpreting a new content of Art. 47 of the FRBA raises new ones - different from
considered with a Decision under cd. 15/2000 questions concerning the compliance of
the interpreted text with the provision of art. 27 (1) нand the constitution - “Foreigners,
who reside in the country legally cannot be
expelled from it or handed over to another state against their will, except
under the conditions and by the order determined by law.

6. While the original text of Art. 47 allows the imposition of coercive
“Administrative measures directly related to the security of
country ”, the text of the Law on Interpretation includes many more hypotheses,
in which the deprivation of the right of residence and expulsion is permissible
of foreigners.

From the reasons to the Law on Interpretation it is clear that the will of the legislator is
just like that. Although the original text of the law separates the concepts
"Security of the country" and "interests of the state", according to the petitioners and
when the interests of the Bulgarian state are endangered, this too
affects the security interests of the country. " The legislator also changes his own
own views on the concept of "security of the country", including not
only what the original law called "national security" or
"Security of the country", but also the extremely broad concept of "interests of
Bulgarian State".

Thus, from the applicability of the restrictive measures under Art. 47 ZCHRB only c
cases directly related to the security of the country where
the urgency procedure and the preliminary feasibility could be
justified, the interpretation significantly changes the meaning of the law, which
already includes measures against any person who has “put in danger
the interests of the Bulgarian state ”or“ its presence in the country
creates a serious threat to ... public order ”- / Art. 42 a.m. last /.

7. Cases in which the person concerned has “endangered interests
of the Bulgarian state ”, or its presence in the country creates
a serious threat to ... public order ”could be not only those
referred to in Art. 10 para. 1 item 1, but also all other cases specified in Art. 10
al. | from the FRBA:

- by his actions he has discredited the Bulgarian state or has damaged its prestige
the dignity of the Bulgarian people;

- has information that he is a member of a criminal group or organization or that he commits
terrorist activity, smuggling and illegal arms deals, explosives
substances, ammunition, strategic raw materials, goods and technologies with
possible dual use, as well as illicit trafficking in narcotics and
psychotropic substances and precursors and raw materials for their production;

there is evidence that he is trafficking in human beings and smuggling into the country, and
removal of persons to other countries;

- it can be assumed that it will spread a severe contagious disease suffering from
disease, "which according to the criteria of the" Ministry of
health or the World Health Organization represents
threat to public health, or does not hold a certificate for
vaccination, or comes from an area with complicated epidemic and epizootic
situation;

- no maintenance is provided and the necessary compulsory insurance during
time of residence in the country and means providing an opportunity
for his return; etc.

Some of these hypotheses, such as acute infectious disease,
which could cause an epidemic, could affect the public interest and
order, but could hardly be linked to national security in the usual
meaning of this concept.

8. With the extended concept of “security of
the country ”the interpreted art. 47 is practically applicable to
any actions and behavior of a foreigner that the executive authorities
authorities are considered to be related to the security, public order and interests of
the state. This makes it possible to impose measures under Art. 47 to be
performed in a vague, indefinable and extremely wide range of conditions.

9. While the ones indicated in art. 10 para. | t. | cases may be acceptable
grounds for refusal of visa / what is the purpose of the text /, broad
wording on the same substantive grounds is inappropriate for
revocation of already provided and guaranteed by laws and the constitution
rights. Such an interpretation does not comply with the requirements of the Constitution

for clarity on the conditions for revoking the right of legal residence, and
expulsion. It can hardly be assumed that the original will of
the legislator was to formulate the text of Art. 47 so:

"They are not subject to appeal, they do not contain factual grounds and
subject to immediate execution of the orders of the Minister of
the interior and the persons authorized by him to seize
the right of legal residence of aliens who threaten
the interests of the Bulgarian state and the expulsion of foreigners,
which pose a serious threat to public order. "

10. Such a will renders meaningless the creation and operation of the rest of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria is in essence directly contradictory
of Art. 27. (1) of the Constitution:

"Foreigners residing in the country legally, no
may be expelled from it or handed over to another state against
their will, except under the conditions and by the order determined by law. ”

11. At the same time, the Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 LFRB expands and changes
the original meaning of the interpreted law and as regards the requirement of
the constitution on "the order determined by law".

Required by the original text of Art. 47 of the FRBA ”direct connection
with the security of the country ”implies objectified actions, which
impose an immediate response in the interests of security. In the Act on
the interpretation of this text indicates all listed in Art. 10 para. | t. | cases
i.e. and persons for whom “there is evidence that he / she acts against the security of
the country ”.

Thus, the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 explicitly includes the possibility of.
imposition of measures based on data whose “direct link to
the security of the country ”could not be checked under the Law on
administrative proceedings, as the laws provide for another order for
the collection of data of such Character.

This excludes the operation of the ZAP not only as regards
the motivation of the orders and their appealability -> as it is
the initial expressed will, but also with regard to the general order of the Law on
administrative proceedings - as regards the procedure for the issuance of
the administrative act.

By the way, the content of the reasons for the> bill> remains
the impression that this is the intention of the interpreter - legislator.
Art. 46 states that “for the issuance of the orders under this section and for their
The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to the appeal. Art. 47 para. D of the same law
contains an exception to this rule ... ”The original meaning of 46 and Art.
47 taken together should not preclude the need to comply with
the other provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act for issuing administrative acts such as
informing the affected person about the initiated procedures, providing

the possibility for an opinion and objections of this person on the collected data,
which give grounds for taking measures, etc.

12. Even if the impression that the interpreter explicitly cancels is wrong
fully the operation of the ZAP, the lack of any with control for
the legality of the acts, as well as their immediate enforceability
repeal tacitly provided by law the procedure for issuance and execution of
expulsion measures is the deprivation of the right of residence of foreigners in
the country.

Taken in its entirety, the provisions of the Law on Interpreted Art. 47 provide
unlimited possibility for arbitrary and uncontrolled disposal of
the rights of this category of persons whenever due to unwillingness to comply with
the law, due to ignorance of it, or due to overdoing, the representatives of
the executive saw in their presence a threat to the national
security, or invoke it, albeit without reason.

13. In the absence of another control mechanism imposed by the discussed law
an absolute ban on courts accepting appeals against
the acts in question also mean a complete lack of any control by
authority independent of the issuer. The complete lack of procedural guarantees
tacitly releases the issuing body itself from the obligations to comply
the general provisions of the ZAP, as well as the FRBA itself in connection with
substantive grounds and / or procedural rules. We believe that
in this way the meaning of the requirements of art. 27 para 1 / of the Constitution is also deleted
"Order determined by law".

The open possibility for too wide and uncontrolled interpretation and application
of Art. 47 in conjunction with Art. 40 and 42 of the FRBA in practice relieves the bodies of
the executive from the obligation to comply with the requirements of the Act itself
for foreigners and repeals the Administrative Act
production. "Contrary to the Constitution, it is practically being introduced
the possibility of FOREIGNERS RESIDING IN THE COUNTRY OF
LEGAL GROUNDS THAT THEY CAN ALWAYS BE EXPELLED FROM
her.

14. With the Law on the Interpretation of a Norm of the FRBA an attempt is made to
misinterpretation of the constitutional content of the concept
"Conditions and order provided by law", referred to in Art. 27 of the Constitution.
With Decision Ho 3 of 1992 on c.d. 30/91 the Constitutional Court has excluded itself
possibility for authoritative interpretation of constitutional norms by law:
"The right of the National Assembly to give cannot be denied
obligatory (authentic) interpretation of constitutional norms ... / n / 0 ...
only under the conditions and in the order under which the National Assembly amends and supplements
provisions of the Constitution ... (art. 153 et seq. of the Constitution). With the norm
of ordinary law ... this cannot happen ”

15. For these reasons, we consider that the new provision of the Act
content of art. 47 of the FRBA is an attempt to interpret a constitutional norm,

reaching the abolition of the guarantees required by this norm for basic
individual rights.

TU. To what extent is the effect of the given by
The Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 LFRB new meaning of the norm

1. The newly introduced with the Law on Interpretation immediately and without appeal
execution of the targeted orders allows the expulsion of foreigners even
and in cases where the expulsion of some is prohibited by another law
categories of persons who are under the protection of international
treaties such as the Geneva Convention on Refugees, the International Convention
convention for the prevention of torture, etc.

The envisaged "immediate implementation" of the envisaged measures, tacitly
repeals Art. 61. of the Refugee Act:

(1) Coercive administrative measures, such as "deprivation of the right to
residence "," forced removal to the border "," expulsion ",
"extradition" and "ban on entry" imposed by
law or an international treaty to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party, of
a foreigner who has declared that he is a refugee is not enforced until the ruling
of the decision of the Chairperson of the Refugee Agency, respectively to
completion of the accelerated refugee status proceedings.

(2) The coercive administrative measures under para. | are canceled when with
the decision of the chairman of the Agency for Refugees of the Foreigner is
granted refugee status or status under Art. 56, para. 1, item 3 or 4 - for
granting protection by year of a refugee recognized under the mandate
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
or the provision of humanitarian protection by the President of the Agency
refugees.

2. He rudely ignores and

THE CONVENTION

against torture and other cruel,

inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

Ratified by Decree Ho 3384 of the State Council of October 9, 1986. Promulgated, SG no.
42 of 3.06.1988, in force for Bulgaria from 26.06.1987, amended. and add., no. 19 from
February 24, 1995

Article 3

No State Party may expel, return
("tegosheg") or extradite a person to another country when there are serious
grounds to believe that it would be in danger of being subjected to
torture.

To determine whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities take
having regard to all the relevant circumstances, including, in
depending on the case, the existence in the country of a systemic
recurrent serious, gross or mass violations of human rights.

According to Art. 2, item 4 of the Law for withdrawal of the reserve and acceptance of declarations
under international conventions of April 1, 1993, published in the State Gazette, issue 30 of 1993
Bulgaria has stated that in accordance with Art. 22 of the same Convention, acknowledges
the competences of the Committee against Torture to receive and consider
communications directly or on behalf of persons under its jurisdiction who claim
that they are a victim of a violation of the provisions of the Convention by a state
- a Party to this Convention. The same Committee shall periodically examine the reports of
States Parties to the Convention on the Content of Laws and
the practice of their application.

3. The Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation provided to
The Constitutional Court opinion on the original text of Art. 47 ZCHRB, c
which examines in detail the need to provide effective
domestic remedies to protect the fundamental rights of the individual from
their possible affection with the ones ruled by the order of art. 47 measures. These
fundamental rights are guaranteed both in the ECHR and in the Bulgarian constitution.
In view of our understanding that the Act under discussion in this case
interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA further worsens the situation of those affected
individuals, we would also like to point out the following:

4. Bulgarian law does not provide a procedure for their protection
fundamental rights, possibly affected by the measures under Art. 47 of the FRBA, as
requires art. 13 of the European Convention on Human and Fundamental Rights
freedom. Instead of introducing such funds, prohibiting the courts
to deal with complaints - whether or not the complaints are not directly related
the affected right of residence in the country, and with the deprivation and violation of
other constitutional rights guaranteed by international instruments on
protection of human rights, the Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 explicitly deleted.
and the last chance to protect these rights.

Undoubtedly, as the original text of Art. 47 of the FRBA, as well as the Law on
interpretations are designed to protect national security - subject to
increased protection in any society as a core value. The Constitution
points to national security as a fundamental principle of a democratic society
along with the fundamental rights of individuals, but not with an advantage over them. She does not
grades in no way the degree of security of these public
interests by placing national security above constitutional ones
rights of individuals, or vice versa. On the contrary, in connection with the need for
the protection of> national security, the Constitution itself, and
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
allow the restriction of the exercise only to those explicitly stated in these
acts of law.

If the opposite interpretation were correct, the Constitution would allow
encroachment on any constitutional right whenever the guarantees of
individual constitutional rights compete with the public interest from
protection of national security.

5. The possibility of national security to be absolute a rpog? would
found a direct and unlimited possibility of abuse of power through
arbitrary reference to this ground - in order to avoid possible
control over the actions of the executive authorities in violation
of individual rights and freedoms. This would set a precedent that
makes senseless the proclamation of fundamental rights and freedoms as a fundamental principle
of our state not only for foreigners, but also for all persons under
the jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria.

By imposing a ban on judicial control over each and everyone
administrative measures imposed by an executive body in connection.
with imminent danger to national security, the Interpretative Law
excludes the possibility for the court to decide whether to accept for consideration
a complaint against the nullity of an act of the administration, as well as his
prohibits discussing both the admissibility and the substance of any
complaints that the appealed act also affects something else - mainly and
irrevocable right of the person concerned. In essence, this means withdrawal
not only the right to judicial review, but also the most essential fundamental
function referred to in Art. 117 - protection of the rights and freedoms of citizens.
This would mean the withdrawal of guarantees for any and all fundamental rights
and freedoms protected by the Constitution and the granting of freedom to
abuse of executive power, from which they are not insured and most
developed democracies.

6. The theory of constitutional law knows rights over which they are not
no restrictions permissible, rights to which restrictions are
admissible only in case of war, martial law or other state of emergency,
as well as rights whose restriction is permissible in the interest of others
constitutional values, but not in the pursuit of other goals.

Due to the nature of the fundamental rights themselves and the degree of their protection,
any law that derives individual rights guaranteed by the Constitution
out of judicial control in connection with any public
necessity, would provoke controversy over the constitutionality of
of the law. The Constitutional Court has already ruled that for this reason
the discretion of the National Assembly to limit judicial control,
provided in Art. 120 para. 2, will always be subject to judgment
constitutionality.

7. In making such an assessment, the Constitutional Court will always
be confronted with a conflict between constitutionally protected values ​​and
the need to choose between them. The choice between guaranteed by
The Constitution values ​​and the principled ruling on such a conflict would
was impossible unless the Constitutional Court created an unforeseen c
The Constitution is a preferential scale of the democratic ones guaranteed by it
values ​​of society. This means that the Court should give more
social and constitutional significance of equally guaranteed by
The Constitution and the rule of law are public values ​​and fundamental
principles of the state, which the Constitution itself does not contain.

As due to the lack of a constitutional scale of basic public
values, and because of the diversity of factual and legal situations,
where such laws can be adopted and applied, such an approach of
the court could hardly give a constitutional answer to
the need for a fair balance in their protection in the interests of
society.

8. In its Decision He 7 under c.d. 9/95 the Constitutional Court has ruled
that:

“The provision of Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria,
which allows the possibility by law to exclude certain categories
administrative acts of judicial review of legality must be
interprets restrictively and does not cover those acts which concern fundamental acts
constitutional rights. "

The opposite would mean the possibility of the rights they represent
constitutional value, be arbitrarily or unjustifiably taken away or
trampled under law or administrative practice. The opportunity
of Parliament to exclude any and all acts of the executive from
judicial control would violate the principles of legality, division of
authorities, the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms and the balance of the three authorities in
democratic state and would leave individuals defenseless against
arbitrariness.

9. In order to guarantee constitutional rights such a level of protection,
as required by the constitution, the judicial path for their protection must always be
to be open to the public. / see Emilia Drumeva, Constitutional Law,
St. Kliment Ohridski University Publishing House, Sofia 1998, pp. 635-7 /

This does not mean that these rights cannot be restricted in any way
degree, nor that they cannot be further regulated by law.
On the contrary, in order to ensure the effective exercise of fundamental rights,
the modern rule of law requires a clear legal regulation
the conditions under which rights may be exercised and limited. The planned
in laws restrictive measures are permissible only when they are clear and
detailed in law and without prejudice to the essential content of
the fundamental right itself. A condition for these restrictions is their imposition only
in the interests of the pursued other - also defensible - constitutional objectives and
the proportionality of the measures to the substance of the matter
right.

10. In accordance with these principles are also provided for in the European
Convention on Human Rights principles of admissibility of restrictions on
the rights guaranteed in it. In order to be able to assess compliance with these
requirements some control guarantees are needed.

According to the review in 1998. by the European Court of Human Rights case
51 пгорощов ап щетв у. Steese, Greek courts refused to register
association of persons with Macedonian national self-consciousness, because it was
suspected of undermining the territorial integrity and security of the state.
In assessing whether an infringement had been committed, the European Court examined
whether the restrictions, which “should be interpreted narrowly, in the sense that
their enumeration is exhaustive, and their definition is necessary
restrictive ”were imposed in the interests of protecting a“ legitimate aim ”and are
were “provided for by law” as required by Article 11/2 / of the ECHR.

The Court notes that “the way in which national law
defines this freedom as well as its practical application by
authorities reveal the degree of democracy in the country in question.
States certainly have the right to make sure that the goals and activities of
an association comply with the rules laid down in their
legislation. However, they must do so in a way that is compatible with
their obligations under the Convention and subject to review by the authorities of
The Convention. "

The Court notes that the exceptions provided for in Article 11/2 / ECHR “should be
interpreted strictly; and only convincing and compelling reasons can
justify restrictions on freedom of association. In determining whether
the need for this in the sense of art. 11/2 / really exists, the states have
limited discretion that goes hand in hand with the strict
European control both in terms of law and in terms of
the decisions under which this law has been applied, including those issued by
independent courts. "

The court “... must assess the alleged interference in the light of the case as
in general and to determine whether the reasons given by the authorities in order to intervene to
be justified are "relevant and sufficient". In doing so, he must
to ensure that the authorities have applied standards that comply with
the principles of Art. | and that the decision was based on an assessment acceptable to the Court
of the relevant facts. " Having considered the facts of the case, the Court
found that the restrictive measure had been imposed by the local courts in
the name of a legitimate aim, but that this measure was not proportionate and
necessary in a democratic society.

From this decision it is clear that even when it comes to goodwill
local authorities to protect national security, the European Court considers.
necessary to consider whether they really were present
relevant and sufficient reasons for imposing restrictions on
this legitimate goal. To make this assessment possible in terms of freedom.
of the association, this court, as well as any other controlling body, should
to have access to the information which imposes the restrictive measure in order to
consider whether it is necessary or not. This is even more important
for the assessment of violations of fundamental and irrevocable rights
which are not subject to restrictions in the interest of any purpose, and
the assessment of whether the required procedural ones have been provided
guarantees and domestic remedies.

11. In its case-law, the European Court of Human Rights has held that
The Convention does not always require judicial review of guarantees of rights. This one
a court has ruled that the state is not obliged to provide
judicial control over the dismissal of civil servants, but not that
the state is free not to provide domestic remedies to
expelled persons against the threat of torture.

W. To what extent the restriction of the right to defense and judicial control over
acts of the executive is admissible by the Constitution

1. The right of defense and access to judicial review are independent rights,
provided by the constitution as procedural guarantees for others
constitutional and legal rights of individuals. They cannot be considered
absolute - in themselves, but always in connection with specifically affected
a right that needs guarantees. The discussed law does not differentiate between
in no way the possibilities for affecting the guaranteed for foreigners
fundamental rights under the constitution from those provided for in the FRBA, which are indisputably
enjoy smaller warranties. On the contrary, the law leaves open the possibility
for equal uncontrolled infringement of both the right of residence and the right of residence
the basic constitutional provisions provided to foreigners residing in the country
rights equal to those of Bulgarian citizens.

2. The provisions of Art. 47 of the FRBA restriction is in the interest of the national
security - indisputably a constitutionally defensible value, for the protection of which
some, but not all, fundamental rights may be limited. It's hardly debatable,
for example, that freedom from torture is irrevocable and unlimited
constitutional law, but in the absence of any control there is no
no guarantee that the prohibition of torture will not be violated by
the expulsion of a person at risk of such treatment in the host country.
This prohibition is absolute both in the constitution and in those ratified by
Bulgaria international instruments, it is not subject to restriction, even
when national security is threatened. With the Law for interpretation of art. 47
the danger of disregarding this prohibition is also confirmed by
the immediate enforceability of the orders in question.

The restrictive measures provided by law are not measurable in relation to them
proportionality is not only not possible, but is explicitly excluded
the judgment of a court or other authority on the proportionality of the measure to
the fundamental rights affected by it.

CA The Constitutional Court has ruled that Parliament is not free to exclude
uch judicial control any administrative acts. Such an opportunity would
made meaningless the very division of powers and the function of the judiciary
as a controller of possible abuse of power.

In its Decision in case 5/97 under c.d. 25/96 The Constitutional Court has discussed
“The question of whether the legislator can arbitrarily exclude the respective
administrative act of judicial appeal. Is it enough for that
his judgment of expediency, or he must be guided by others

criteria for determining this exception. Assuming that
the legislator may, as appropriate, decide as he sees fit
the question of the exceptions under para. 2, will lead to the meaninglessness of the main
constitutional principle of judicial control over administrative
acts laid down in the texts of Art. 120 of the Constitution.

The Constitutional Court considers that the legislator can establish
exceptions from the court order for appealing against administrative acts only
when this exception does not prejudice the constitutionally recognized
fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens, or when another, higher, but
an explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be a priority
protected (such is the field of national security).
Without prejudice to fundamental constitutionally recognized rights and freedoms of
citizens is emphasized as a criterion for the exception under Art. 120, para. 2 of
The Constitution and in the decisions of the Constitutional. court under k. e. Lo 13 of 1993
г., к.д. dot 1995 ik. d.L0 18 0t 1995. ”

4. Exclusion from judicial control of individual administrative acts,
which infringe fundamental constitutional rights and freedoms ’when another, more
a supreme but explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be
protected as a matter of priority ”should also be proportionate and proportionate
with the different degree of admissibility of
restrictions on fundamental rights and freedoms - according to their value in
society.

5. The different degree of importance of the rights concerned also implies different ones
by degree of guarantee, including procedural, for their protection
in accordance with these principles, the Constitutional Court held that in the hypothesis
of Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution such exclusion (of judicial control)
is inadmissible when fundamental constitutional rights are affected - Decision
Ho 21 on cd. He 18 from 1995, reported by Judge Todor Todorov.

This principle is also confirmed in Decision He 11 of 30.1U.1998 under c.d. Ho 10/98 on
The Constitutional Court, reported by Judge Georgi Markov:

"The right to defense, including judicial protection, is a fundamental, universal and personal right
... it is irrevocable. ... Art. 56 of the Constitution has immediately
action and can act alone as a last resort
opportunity for citizens whose rights and legitimate interests have been violated ...
It should be borne in mind that it is the judiciary that is called upon by
The Constitution to protect the rights and legitimate interests of citizens -
Art. 117, para. | of the basic law. In the system of legal guarantees for protection
the rights and legitimate interests of citizens are the highest judicial,
because the court in its activity is independent and is subject only to the law - art.
117, para. 2 of the Basic Law.

"Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution ... allows the exclusion of judicial control
by the legislator only in respect of certain administrative acts
in connection with administrative rather than contractual employment. But
and in the hypothesis of art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution is such an exclusion

inadmissible when fundamental constitutional rights are affected - Decision Lo
21 on c.d. Lo 180t 1995. ”

This decision was rendered in connection with the constitutionally enshrined right
of labor and is even more valid with regard to the need for
protection and judicial control against possible infringements of rights which
are absolute and do not allow any exceptions or limitations, including
and for reasons of national security. They can't be
arguments why through a completely discretionary act of the administration
freedom from torture may be left without any guarantees
against violations, while the right to work enjoying more limited
protection, would enjoy a high degree of protection through judicial review.

6. In the absence of any other legal possibility for protection against encroachment
on fundamental rights, the court should be free to apply the Law on
foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria to the extent that it corresponds to
the constitution. With Decision He 3 of 1992 under c.d. 30/91 the Constitutional Court is
accepted that such an interpretation could not be made by the legislature. “Interpretation
of constitutional texts can be done in the law enforcement process
by judicial and administrative bodies ”. The law under discussion directly affects
the function of the judiciary as an independent guarantor of the rights of individuals.
An independent court is one that is not bound by the executive, or with which
to be one of the parties to the dispute, as well as who has institutional and legal
guarantees that he will not be subjected to any pressure in enacting
your decisions.

In this case we are not talking about pressure, but about a direct order of the National Assembly with
the powers of the court to exercise control over the act of enforcement
power, as well as on pronounced for two years by
courts acts. The possibility to announce issued judicial acts
for null and void and the instructions of the parliament on the manner of consideration and decision
of disputes make the very existence of the judiciary meaningless.

7. In terms of the general principle of separation of powers as is
the described interference of the legislature in the judiciary is inadmissible,
so it is imperative and inherent in this principle, the control that the judiciary
power by its nature exercises over the actions of the administration, ie.
of the executive branch.

8. Judicial control over administrative acts is constitutive
element of the rule of law. Emerged historically as an expression of the idea of
division and balancing of powers in the state, it is also an expression of subordination
of state power of the Constitution and laws. The courts in
democratic societies are called upon to provide legitimacy and guarantees to
citizens against arbitrariness precisely through the control they exercise
on the legality of the actions of the executive. IN
the development of the idea of ​​balance and complementarity of the three separate powers of the court is
assigned the role of arbitrator, authorized to annul illegal acts
of the executive branch. There is a real danger to citizens' rights

and for abuse of executive power if wrongfully and unreasonably
limits judicial control.

In its Decision He 13 of 1993 under cd. 13/93 The Constitutional Court is
ruled:

“The power under Art. 120, para. |! derives from the provision of Art. 4, para. Goth
The Constitution ... According to this provision, the Republic of Bulgaria is legal
country. It is governed by the Constitution and the laws of the country.
The meaning of this norm is in the complete binding of the exercise of
state power from the norms of law. "An expression of human rights
the rule of law is also a function of administrative justice,
provided to the courts as a means of ensuring the rule of law in
the field of public administration. It is called to protect itself
legality. Developed administrative justice is only in the legal
country. "Therefore, in the provision of Art. 120 contains one of
guarantees so that the norm of Art. 4, para. | only one constitutional
a wish of a declarative political nature. w

About two centuries ago, the US Supreme Court noted the Magritte y case.
Mafvop that every employee of the executive branch, even the State
the secretary has duties prescribed to him by law, and in their performance he is
independent, subject only to the laws. "It simply came to our notice then
a high-ranking official, but he is not above the law ... ”It would not be in
in line with the line of conduct of our political institutions,
continues the U.S. Air Force, and with the conduct of U.S. citizens if
any government official to whom they are assigned
obligations, is placed above compliance with the law in the implementation of these
obligations. " As for the guarantees for these requirements, the Supreme Court
also answers the question of who and when should monitor compliance with the laws and
constitution and to assess the actions of the Secretary of State.

"If it is a question of a document on which, according to the law, the state one
the Secretary shall issue an official copy, and on the basis of which against
the payment of ten cents the law gives one right, then what in
high-ranking employee can prohibit any one
person to defend in court their legal rights, or prohibit the court to
consider such a complaint or issue an act ordering it
obligation to be fulfilled without regard to the discretion of
the executive branch, but only by the laws and general principles of
the right? ”

The solution also touches on the other side of this problem - the issue of freedom of
citizens in the broadest sense of the word, their civil rights and
the right to defense: “If the person has a right and this right has been violated, whether
the laws in that country give him protection? ... The very essence of
civil liberty certainly consists in the right of every person
to seek the protection afforded by law at any time,

when it is damaged. One of the first duties of the government is
to provide this protection. "

Referring to one of the authors of the US Constitution -
Blackstone, the Court also proclaimed the principle enshrined in the relationship between
administration and citizens that “whenever there is a legal right, there is also
legal protection through a lawsuit or court act ... when that right is
violated ”.

Starting from these principled positions, the US Air Force concludes that all
actions, even of the Secretary of State, are subject to scrutiny by
the court when they affect civil rights. "When there is an obligation
prescribed by. the law and its implementation depend on the individual, it seems
it is absolutely clear that the person who is considered to be injured has the right to apply
to the laws of the state for protection ", the decision says.
"The US government has been called unequivocally many times
government of laws, not people. It certainly won't deserve that
high opinion if the laws do not provide protection in case of violation of one
existing law. "

These principles, although stated almost two centuries ago, are still valid today
every democratic and legal state.

9. The principle of separation of powers may be violated when one of
branches of government may interfere inadmissibly in constitutional
the recognized functions of another, or when a function is denied to one authority,
which is inherent in it. In both cases there is a real danger of
uncontrolled exercise of power. Both are affected by the law under discussion
aspect of this basic principle. In the first place we are talking about the independence of
the judiciary from> the legislature and the intervention of the latter in
the judicial and interpretative function of the courts, and secondly, the
the issue of control that the judiciary can and should
carried out in the acts of the administration.

10. The existence and functioning of a separate judiciary with
due to the need for an independent arbitrator in relations between citizens
and the state to monitor compliance with the law and distribute
justice. Therefore, according to Alexander Hamilton - one of the fathers of
the Constitution of the United States ", the judiciary will always be the most
a little dangerous for the rights in the constitution ... Although, from time to time
from the work of the courts may arise individual
injustice, the general freedom of the people can never be
endangered by this branch of government. " This is also stated in
Bulgarian legal literature: “Of all the three authorities, it is the (judicial)
independent and preserved from the influences of the other two ”(Em. Drumeva -
Constitutional Law, University Publishing House "St. Kliment Ohridski",
Sofia 1998, pp. 635-7 /.

The task facing any country in which rights and freedoms are respected
of the individual, is to create an order that guarantees these freedoms while guarding

citizens by other citizens and by the state itself. “A society in which
the rights of the individual are not guaranteed and in which it is not provided
the separation of powers, there is no constitution, ”says Article 16 of the French.
the Declaration of Human Rights of 1789 Today these words express
fundamental principle of constitutionalism in any legal and
democratic state.

The separation of powers is a means of organizing a state with which
aims to limit concentration and abuse of power by separating
the functions of the state between its separate structural units. At the base
on this principle stands the idea that absolute and unlimited power,
concentrated in one person or group of people, leads to a violation of the basics
of any rule of law. It is no coincidence that the separation of powers is denied by
totalitarian and dictatorial regimes. Montesquieu also notes that: “so
as any ruler is prone to abuse of power, one should
find such a way of state organization in which a power to
restrains others and vice versa. The basis of this doctrine, now adopted in
all democracies and rule of law, there is a need to ensure
individual freedom and to prevent abuse of power.

11. The careful analysis of the text of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 ZCHRB and
the reasons for it indicate an intention to expand the scope of art.
47 outside the hypotheses of imminent danger to national security and
raises questions about the compliance of the introduced new meaning of the provision with
the right of foreigners not to be expelled from the country ”except under conditions and
by order provided by law ”. The interpretative law constitutes an attempt at seizure
of the interpretive and judicial functions of the judiciary through
direct instructions and orders of the legislator regarding the subject and
the manner of its exercise, leading to the rendering of the judiciary and
revocation of its powers.
OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on
constitutional case Mo 2 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of 13 February 2001
we are constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case
Mo 2 for 2001, formed at the request of a group of MPs from
38th National Assembly for establishing the unconstitutionality
of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria (Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the FRBA). It's up to the case
joined the request of the panel of the Third Division of
The Supreme Administrative Court in constitutional case Mo 4 for 2001,
whose subject is the same.

The request of the group of MPs states that
The law for> interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA was> entirely
unconstitutional as they were unconstitutional as
its only article and "the only paragraph of its
final provision. The arguments with which the MPs
substantiate their allegations of unconstitutionality, are divided
in two groups - on the unconstitutionality of the Law on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA as an interpretative law, and regarding

the unconstitutionality of all texts in the law - article
single and paragraph only.

The opinion of the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court, although expressed in the request in the form of
questions to the Constitutional Court, as well as the arguments in support of this
opinion are largely analogous to those in the group's request
MPs, in some parts even literally it
reproduce, so they do not need to be commented on

separately.

1. Regarding the allegations of unconstitutionality of
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA as an interpretative law

According to the> group of people's> representatives principles and
the provisions of art. 8, Art. 117, para. 2, Art. 124 and Art. 125, para. 1 of
The Constitution excluded the possibility for the National Assembly to give
authentic interpretation of its legislation. This is yours
allegation they substantiate on the one hand with the argument that the possibility of
the legislator himself to interpret the laws led inevitably to “at least
two possibilities hostile to our constitutionalism -
compromising legal certainty by substituting the will of
the parliamentary majority with retroactive effect of one
next parliament, and on the other, with the argument that the National Assembly does not
the right to interpret laws, as the Constitution mandates this
activity of the courts.

The argument that in interpreting the law legal certainty is
compromised by substituting the will of the parliamentary
a retroactive majority of the next Parliament, is
completely> insolvent. The Constitution does not link laws with
the parliamentary majority by which they were adopted, nor solely by
The National Assembly, in whose mandate they were adopted. Every People's
Assembly has full constitutional authority to
adopts, amends, supplements and repeals laws, and after the Constitution
does not limit it in the content of the laws, this includes the law

to adopt interpretative laws as well. Moreover, in this case the 38th

The National Assembly has adopted an interpretative law on a text by the FRBA, which
was also adopted by the 38th National Assembly.

The argument of the group of people cannot be supported either
representatives, which is also shared by the composition of the Third Department of
The Supreme Administrative Court that after Art. 84, item 1 of
The Constitution authorizes the National Assembly to adopt, amend,
supplements and repeals the laws, it has no right to interpret them. The authentic
interpretation is an activity inherent in any body that receives or issues
regulations. Indisputable right of the body that issued or adopted the act,
is to issue or adopt another act clarifying the meaning attached to
the act and his will expressed in the act. The lack of explicit regulation is not
prohibition of authentic interpretation. On the contrary, it would be an explicit regulation
necessary only if a body other than the body which issued or adopted the act is
authorized to interpret it as it was in the action of the annulled
Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria of 1971, according to which the State
council interpreted laws passed by the National Assembly. In that
the interpretation of a law is also made by a law (which derives from
the need for “the interpreted and the interpretative act to> be
equal in terms of the hierarchy of regulations)
and in this sense to authorize the National Assembly to accept
laws under Art. 84, item 1 of the Constitution also includes authorization for
adoption of interpretative laws.

The Group of MPs and the composition of the Third Department of
The Supreme Administrative Court substantiated its claim for
constitutional prohibition for the National Assembly to interpret the laws and with
the argument that the clarification by action egg otpez of the exact meaning of
legal norms is a judicial function inherent in
judicial authorities, which stemmed from the powers of the
The Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court yes
exercise supreme judicial oversight for accurate and uniform application
of laws - art. 124 Art. 125, para. 1 of the Constitution.

It is indisputable that any person when considering his behavior with
the law, as well as any body to which the implementation is assigned or

application of the law, interpret it to clarify the meaning attached to

him. However, the interpretation of the law enforcement body cannot be interpreted
opposes or replaces or excludes the authentic interpretation
of the law by the body that adopted it. The courts when
administer justice, interpret the law and the binding force of theirs
judicial acts shall extend to the persons referred to in
procedural laws. In this sense, the interpretation of the courts in
their judicial activity is inherently an interpretation,
what every state body does in the application of the law, with this
difference that on the basis of its interpretation the court rules acts with
binding force specified in the procedural laws. As far as
the interpretation of the law that the court makes when considering
disputes is contained in the grounds of the judicial act and not in the operative part,
its binding force is even more limited. On the other hand,
the empowerment of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Court
administrative court to adopt interpretative decisions and to give
mandatory instructions of the courts, also can not replace or yes
exclude the authentic interpretation of the body which adopted the act. The instructions of
The Supreme Court of Cassation on the interpretation and application of
substantive law are binding on the court to which the case has been returned
(Article 218h of the Code of Civil Procedure), interpretative decisions
of the Supreme Court of Cassation and of the Supreme Administrative Court are
obligatory for the bodies of the judiciary and the executive power (art.
86, para. 2 and Art. 97, para 2 of the Judiciary Act - JSA, Art. 45 from
The Law on the Supreme Administrative Court - ZVAS). Theirs
binding force does not extend to the legislature and the
In practice, it manifests itself only in court proceedings at and under
occasion of a lawsuit. This proves once again that
the interpretation of the courts cannot displace or exclude
the authentic interpretation of the authority which adopted or issued the act since
the binding force of the acts of the bodies of the judiciary, p
which is interpreted by law does not extend to all state
bodies, organizations and citizens, as is the case with the mandatory
force of the laws and the decisions of the National Assembly (art. 86, para 2 of

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria). There is no conclusion in another sense and

of Art. 124 and Art. 125, para. 1 of the Constitution. The purpose of the provided in
The Constitution is the supreme judicial supervision for accurate and uniform application
of the laws is to ensure equality and justice in
litigation, not to replace or replace the authentic
interpretation of regulations. This is clear from both
constitutional texts that do not bind the powers of the supreme
courts with the correct and uniform application of the laws always and by all
- the powers of the Supreme Court of Cassation under Art. 124 refer to
the application of the law by the courts, the powers of the Supreme
administrative court under Art. 125, para. 1 relate to the application of
laws in administrative justice.

It is not clear what argument the MPs draw from
the reasons for the bill, and in particular the reference in the reasons
of the contradictory and contradictory case law.
The existence of legislation aimed at eliminating
the contradictory case law on the application of a normative act,
does not preclude the right of the authority which adopted or issued the act to intervene as
amend, supplement or interpret the act in such a way as to achieve its purpose
and to clarify the indisputable and binding for all, not just for
the bodies of the judiciary and the executive way the will of the body and
meaning attached to the act. As stated, the authentic interpretation
it has nothing to do with the interpretation of the implementing authorities
regulations and can not be argued that with the authentic
interpretation of the law takes away the powers of the supreme courts
to make interpretative decisions to ensure accurate and
equal application of the law in the administration of justice.

We find no reason to comment on the allegations about
unconstitutionality of art. 47 and Art. 51 of the Normatives Act
acts (LNA), as we are not aware of an incidental procedure
declaration of unconstitutionality, without an explicit request in such
meaning. It is common ground that Article 47 of the LNA cannot be applied to
the operation of the 1991 Constitution, but Art. 51 is an effective norm,
which has not been declared unconstitutional and in our opinion cannot

shall be deemed to have been repealed by virtue of the direct effect of the Constitution (5

3, para. 1 of its Transitional and Final Provisions). I will not
we also comment on the allegation of the contradiction between the Law on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA and the LNA, as a contradiction between the two
the law cannot justify unconstitutionality.

Finally, all in connection with the powers of the National Assembly
to give an authentic interpretation, account should be taken of what is stated in
the reasons for Decision Mo 3 of 1992 of the Constitutional Court of
Republic of Bulgaria, ruled on constitutional case Me 30 for 1991
in which it is said:

"The right to give to the National Assembly cannot be denied
obligatory (authentic) interpretation of constitutional norms. But this
it can take place only under the conditions and in the order under which the People's
Assembly amends and supplements the provisions of the Constitution insofar as
it does not envisage this to be done by the Grand National Assembly (Art.
153 et seq. Of the Constitution). ”

After the Constitutional Court has ruled that the National Assembly
can give an authentic interpretation of constitutional norms by law,
accepted under the conditions and by the order of art. 153 et seq. Of the Constitution, then p
the National Assembly can give an even greater reason authentically
interpretation of laws with a law adopted under the conditions and by the order of art. 84,
t. Tichl. 87 and 88 of the Constitution.

2. On the unconstitutionality of the individual texts
in the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA

(a) a single member

According to the group of MPs and according to the composition of the Third
department of the Supreme Administrative Court sentence one of the article
the only one of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA contained new ones
material and procedural norms, which contradicted Art. 4, para. 1,
Art. 5, para. 5, Art. Article 27 56 of the Constitution.

Both requests contain only allegations of contradiction with
Art. 4, para. 1, respectively Art. 4, Art. Article 27 56 of the Constitution without
point to any arguments in support of these allegations.

Nevertheless, we believe that there is no contradiction with the Constitution.

There is no prohibition in the interpretative law to contain others
substantive or procedural rules. The assessment of
the constitutionality of these norms should be done no
only with a view to their inclusion in an interpretative law, but with a view to
their retroactive effect, which Every interpretative law has, and
the conformity of the regulation thus created with the Constitution. IN
In this case, the regulation thus created does not affect fundamental rights and others
constitutional values, nor does it contradict constitutional texts
and this is not stated in the requests either. In doing so, the determination of the listed
in the text orders as subject to immediate execution and as
not subject to appeal are not new substantive and
procedural rules, as the non-appealability arises from Art.
47, para. 1 of the FRBA, and the immediate implementation is a legal consequence of
the non-appealability and, accordingly, the lack of a statutory deadline
for the entry into force of these orders.

The claims allege that the second sentence of the sole article of
The Law on Interpretation of the FRBA contradicts Art. 4, para. 1, art. 8, Art. 117,
al. 2 and Art. 121, para. 2 of the Constitution according to the group of people
representatives, respectively of Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution according to
the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court.

The arguments of the group of MPs and most of all strange
example by which they substantiate their claim, in our opinion point to
misunderstanding of the text. The second sentence of the sole article applies
only until the assessment of whether an administrative act is
directly related to the security of the country, which by virtue of
the law excludes the judicial appeal of the act, and not to the whole
assessment of the act, including the competence of the body that issued it
has issued. In all likelihood, MPs did not understand
that an order issued by a body not specified in the FRBA is not in the category of
the orders listed in the Law for interpretation of art. 47, para. 1 of the FRBA, as
as they are issued only by the bodies authorized for this by law.

The statement of the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court for contradiction with art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution
also cannot be shared. The non-appealability of the acts, p

which impose coercive administrative measures under the FRBA,
directly related to the security of the country, does not arise from
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA, and from Art. 47 of the FRBA, which is not
subject of this constitutional case. Nevertheless, it should be
has in mind in Decision Mo 5 of the Constitutional Court of 1997 on
constitutional case Mo 25 for 1996 states that “... the legislator
may establish exceptions to the court procedure for appealing to
administrative acts only when this exception does not
infringes on the constitutionally recognized fundamental rights and freedoms of
citizens, or when another, higher, but explicitly constitutional
declared value must be protected as a matter of priority (that is
for example, in the field of national security) ”.

At the request of the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme
administrative court also contains a statement of contradiction of
sentence two of the only article with art. 6, para. 1 of the Convention on
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Because, however, no
made a request to declare non-compliance with the law with
international treaty to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party, which is
hypothesis separate from the declaration of unconstitutionality - Art. 149,
al. 1, item 2 it. 4 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court justifiably does not
has allowed the discussion of the request in this part.

Sentence three of the only article of the Law on Interpretation of Art.
47 of the LARB is disputed by the group of MPs and the composition
of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court as
contrary to Art. Article 8 117, para. 2 of the Constitution, respectively of
Art. 120, para. You art. 121, para. You 2 of the Constitution, as with him
gave instructions to the courts on how to decide cases. We do not share
this statement in the claims. The indication in the law of legal
the grounds on which the appeals are dismissed,
there is no nature of instructing the courts on how to decide
cases. This is because the idea of ​​the law is that in the concrete
cases there can be no litigation for the court to consider and yes
decides and in which the legislator to intervene in contradiction with

The Constitution, giving instructions on the merits of the dispute. in

in the specific case, the law creates a prescription by way of interpretation
for the conduct of the courts in the hypotheses specified in the interpreted law.
Perception to the contrary would lead to a challenge to
the constitutionality of all texts in the procedural ones
laws prescribing the actions of the court in the specified in
law hypotheses.

The fourth sentence of the sole article is disputed as
contrary to Art. 121, para. 2 of the Constitution according to the group
MPs, respectively of Art. 120, para. 1, art. 121, para. 1i2
according to the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court.
All these constitutional texts regulate a matter related
only with court proceedings. In that sense, they are
irrelevant to the texts of the law, as, as already stated,
ichl. 47 of the FRBA, and the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA are excluded
legal proceedings in respect of orders relating
directly with the security of the country.

According to the group of MPs> the most drastic
discrepancy is contained in the fourth and fifth sentences (for each
probability only sentence five is meant) because it was thwarted
not only the right to appeal, but also the power of the prosecution to
protests administrative acts. According to them, the power of
the prosecution under Art. 127, т. 3 от The Constitution to monitor compliance
of legality by taking action to repeal
illegal acts, did not tolerate the restriction under Art. 120, para. 2 of
The Constitution. A statement to that effect is missing from the panel's request
of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court.

We believe that the power of the prosecution to protest
administrative acts suffer even more restrictions than
the right of appeal of the persons affected by the act. The control of legality,
assigned to the prosecution with art. 127, item 3, does not mean unconditionally and
unlimited power to challenge everyone in court
administrative acts. There is no authoritative text in the Constitution
the prosecution to challenge in court all administrative acts,
while Art. 120, para. 2 explicitly proclaims the right of citizens and

legal entities to appeal all administrative acts that
affect them, except as expressly provided by law. This means that
the active legitimacy of the prosecution as a party to the judiciary
proceedings may arise only from an express procedural rule in
law, but not from the general authorization for control of legality under Art. 127,
item 3 of the Constitution. In this sense is Art. 119, para. 5 of JSA, according to
which the prosecutor protests and seeks the annulment or amendment of
illegal acts within the term and by the order, provided in the law. Neither
The Law on Administrative Procedure (ZAP) and ZVAS do not
unlimited or even more powers of the prosecution to
disputes administrative acts than the persons affected by
these acts. This also follows from Art. 34 of the Administrative Procedure Act, which excludes
the appeal in court of certain categories of administrative
acts (and the appeal includes the filing of a protest), this follows and
otchl. 20, para. 1 of ZVAS.

Also according to the group of MPs nowhere in
The Constitution does not give any authority the power to
excluded the power of the court to exercise control over legality under
Art. 120, para. 1 of the Constitution. We will not comment on the solvency
of such a statement, we will only note that the court implements
control of legality and provide judicial protection of the rights and
the legitimate interests of citizens, legal entities and the state under
their request, and not ex officio, by self-referral on their own initiative.
Therefore, with the exclusion of citizens' law and legal
persons to appeal a certain category of administrative acts of
In practice, the Constitution allows for the exclusion of judicial control over.
these acts. This is also evident from the used wording of Art. 120, para. 1,
according to which the courts exercise control over the legality of
acts and actions (and not of acts and actions) of the administrative
organs.

Sentence six of the only article of the Law on Interpretation of Art.
47 of the FRBA is disputed as contradictory to Art. 8 and Art. 117, para. 2 of
The Constitution, according to the group of MPs, respectively of Art.

4, para. Tichl. 117 according to the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme

Administrative Court. Both claims allege that the assessment of
the nullity of judicial acts was made in the judicial system and that
the annulment by law of the decisions already rendered
closed cases ”compromised legal certainty and legality
of the state in general ”.

This claim also cannot be supported. The legal one
the text does not declare the nullity of specific judicial acts, but
determines the hypothesis of nullity of an indefinite number of judicial acts and
it is formulated in the abstract, like any legal norm. In this regard
account should be taken of what is stated in the grounds of Decision Mo 2 of
1994 of the> Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria under
Constitutional Case Mo 2 of 1994, which states:

"The argument that the Supplementary Act must also be rejected
of the Law on Supplementing the Civil Procedure Code
referred to two specific cases and was created for them. The law is
formulated abstractly. Whether or not it is unconstitutional is not

depends on the number of cases to which it will apply. "

6) single paragraph - Final provision

In the requests of the group of MPs and the composition of
Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court allegedly
paragraph only was unconstitutional because it attached
retroactive force of law.

According to Art. 5, para. 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria
the normative acts shall enter into force three days after their promulgation,
unless otherwise specified in them. According to MPs
the term was a future certain event, which meant that the entry into
force could take effect at the earliest at the time of promulgation of the act.
Also, according to them, this led to the unconstitutionality of Art. 14,
al. 1 of the LNA, which provided for the possibility of giving the opposite
force of a normative act as an exception and with an explicit norm.

We will not comment on the allegations of unconstitutionality
of Art. 14, para. 1 of the LNA, as this is not the subject of the request.

Indeed, the deadline is in the category of certain events, but it is not

means that it is only future and that as a term it cannot be
determined a past moment. In this sense, we do not consider that Art. 5, para. 5
of the Constitution excludes the possibility of retroactive effect
of the normative act and that the text giving retroactive force to the act is more
home unconstitutional. On the contrary, it would be such only if in
as a result of the retroactive effect of the act are violated basic
constitutional rights and values ​​or another contradiction arises with
The Constitution. In the present case, there is no such violation either
contradicts and this is not claimed by the group of people either
representatives, nor from the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
Administrative Court. Argument on the admissibility of retroactive force
of the normative act also follows from art. 5, para. 3 of the Constitution. This one
constitutional text excludes the possibility of giving the opposite
force in a particular case, which would be superfluous if the Constitution
did not allow the retroactive effect of the normative act at all. In this regard
account should also be taken of what is stated in the statement of reasons in Decision Me 18 of
1997 of the Constitutional Court in constitutional case Ko 12 for 1997,
which states:

"In principle, the Constitution does not exclude the right of the People's
assembly to adopt norms retroactively. Such an exception is explicit
is stipulated in Art. 5, para. 3 of the Constitution, but obviously not
there is a general ban on other cases. "

In view of the above, we consider that the demands of the group
MPs and the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court to declare unconstitutional
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic

Bulgaria are unfounded and should be rejected.
OPINION
from
lawyer Mikhail Ekimdzhiev
Plovdiv, 021 Otets Paisiy Str., Tel / fax: 032 26 4097,
Plenipotentiary of the Association for European Integration and Human Rights -
Plovdiv

1. PROCEDURE.

By Order of the Constitutional Court of 3 May 2001. “Association for
European integration and human rights ”was constituted as a stakeholder
party to the constitutional case He 12/2001.

The case was initiated at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria
for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para 1 of the Law for election of
MPs / ZINP !, according to which:

"During the election campaign, the registered candidates for
MPs and advocates may not be detained and
brought to criminal responsibility, except in the cases of severe cases
a crime ”.

P. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE REQUEST TO THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION.

The main legal arguments of the Prosecutor General of the Republic
can be summarized as follows:

2.1. At the formal legal level it is argued that criminal law
immunity, as a specific exception to the constitutional principle of equality
of citizens before the law, can be provided only in
The Constitution. In support of this opinion, the provisions of Article 69 are indicated,
70,147,132 of the Constitution, regulating the abolition of criminal
responsibility and inviolability of certain categories of persons - people
representatives, judges, prosecutors, investigators.

Based on these examples, the thesis is argued that it is not possible by law
creates immunity for persons other than those exhaustively specified in the Constitution.

2.2. In substantive terms, the Prosecutor General claims that the provision
of Article 53, paragraph | of the ZINP contradicts the constitutional principle of equality of

citizens, objectified in the provision of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, according to
which:

“Fri. 6 (2) All citizens are equal before the law. None are allowed
restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political
affiliation, personal and social status or property status. "

In support of that view, the applicant refers to the provisions of
127, item 1 and art. 31, para 1 of the Constitution, according to which:

Art. 127 The Prosecutor's Office monitors the observance of the law by:
1. bring to justice the persons who have committed
crimes, and upholds the charge in criminal cases of a general nature;

Art. 31, para 1 Everyone accused of a crime should be handed over to
the judiciary within the legally prescribed period.

The Prosecutor General also claims that the challenged provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of Art
ZINP ”can seriously impede the prosecution of
perpetrators of crimes, including serious crimes ”.

W. LEGAL ANALYSIS

3.1. For the correct definition of the subject and the constitutional aspects of
the problem under consideration, I consider it appropriate to adopt "a rio!" the fiction that
the request of the Prosecutor General is well-founded and art. 53, para | from ZINP is
unconstitutional. In practice, this would mean that within 29-
the daily term of the election campaign, the bodies of the Police, the Investigation and
The prosecution could take repressive measures / arrest,
formation of a preliminary investigation, detention / against everyone
candidate for MP and thus de Vasco to predetermine
the failure of his candidacy.

In this context, the Prosecutor General's request configured two
fundamental constitutional principles of the rule of law - the principle of.
equality of citizens before the law / art. 6, para 2 / and the principle of division of
the authorities / art. 8, para 1 /.

In this respect, the task of the Constitutional Court in the present case is to.
find the optimal, from the point of view of law and public interest, balance in
the outlined competition of basic constitutional principles.

In my opinion, the appropriate starting position in the search for this balance is
the provision of art. |, para. | of the Constitution, according to which “Bulgaria is a republic with
parliamentary government ”The constitutionally established supremacy of
Parliament assumes the highest degree of reliability of the normative
guarantees, both for independence in its operation and for the conditions of.
its formation.

From this point of view, the one regulated in Art. 53, para! from ZINP immunity of
candidates for MPs can be considered as one

Art. 5 of the PPC “Against persons who enjoy immunity with respect to
of the criminal jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria, the procedural actions,
provided for in this Code may be carried out only in accordance with the rules
of international law. "

Therefore, at the formal legal level, the fact that the immunity of
candidates for MPs was introduced by law without having a corresponding
constitutional text does not lead to unconstitutionality of the provision of
Article 53, para. from ZINP.

3.3. The opinion of the Prosecutor General that
the provision of art. 53, para. of the Law on Public Procurement contradicts Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution,
according to which:

"All citizens are equal before the law. None are allowed
restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political
affiliation, personal and social status or property status. "

This is because in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law they are exhaustively indicated
social characteristics excluding restrictions on the rights or granting of
privileges / The Constitutional Court has expressed its unequivocal opinion on
this issue in Decision He 14 of 10.11.1992. on constitutional case He 14/92 / V
the same decision the CC held that in terms of features and criteria that are not.
exhaustively listed in Article 6, paragraph 2, the Constitution allows certain restrictions
rights and granting privileges to certain social groups. In all
these cases, according to the Constitutional Court, are socially necessary and social
justified privileges, while maintaining the primacy of the principle of equality of arms
all citizens before the law.

I consider that this view, by analogy, can be reproduced in
the present case. In the case under consideration, the quality “candidate for the people
representative ”does not correspond to any of the limited ones listed in art. 6, para 2
social criteria in respect of which the Constitution excludes any
form of inequality. On the other hand, as stated above,
the provision of art. 53 para. of the ZINP introduces a short - term privilege for
a narrow circle of persons who serve the public “interest and the defensible
constitutional principles.

3.4. I consider that the art. 127, item | and Article 31, paragraph 1
of the Constitution have no direct bearing on the issue under consideration.

3.4.А. The first of these provisions guarantees
bringing to justice “the perpetrators
crimes ”.

Because, according to Article 54 of the Law on Public Procurement, the election campaign continues
exactly 29 days, it could hardly be assumed that the impossibility of a candidate for
a Member of Parliament to be detained or prosecuted
it was during this period that the criminal repression would be thwarted.

socially acceptable exception to the principle of equality of citizens before
of the law.

In support of this view, I put forward the following arguments:

Possible dropping of the one guaranteed by the Law> criminal
the inviolability of candidates would jeopardize:

A / The possibility, in case of possible loss of immunity, the organs
the police and the judiciary to take compromising actions
candidates for MPs, with able to defile the electoral vote.
This would actually jeopardize the selective guaranteed in Article 42 of the Constitution
right.

B / The principle of separation of powers / art. 8 para 1 /

The ability for the executive and the judiciary to manipulate
the election campaign and to influence the composition of the future parliament, in case
the waiver of the immunity of the candidates for MPs would inevitably
led to a disturbance of the balance between the authorities to the detriment of the legislature.

C / The possibility to distort the principles of formation of
Parliament, and through them the independence of the National Assembly, as supreme
legislative body, creates a real danger of distorting the principle of
the people's sovereignty referred to in Art. para 2 of the Constitution, according to which “The whole
state power comes from the people ”.

The violation of these fundamental constitutional principles is in
able to discredit the very essence of the "rule of law" and
parliamentarism as a form of government.

Against the background of these very real dangers for the post-totalitarian state,
far more acceptable, from the point of view of the public interest, it seems
granting a short-term / 29 days / privilege to an insignificant, c
statistical plan, number of persons nominated for MPs.

Based on these considerations, I consider that, in general, the provision of.
Article 53, paragraph | of the ZINP is a justified, admissible and even necessary, from the point of view
point of law, the public interest and the Constitution itself, with the exception of
the principle of equality of citizens before the law.

The following arguments against the request of
The Chief Prosecutor:

3.2. The claim of the petitioner that criminal is not convincing
immunity cannot be introduced by law. It is not such a constitutional principle
objectified declaratively in the provisions of the Constitution, nor can it be
deduced categorically from the norms of the current Bulgarian legislation.
Sufficiently convincing in this regard is the fact that Article 5 of the Penal Code and Art.
although by reference to the norms of international law, regulate
immunity of certain categories of foreign nationals.

Art. 3, para! of the Penal Code “The Penal Code applies to all
crimes committed on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria.

para 2 The issue of the responsibility of foreigners who use
immunity in respect of the criminal jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria
decides in accordance with the norms of international law adopted by it. "

 

3.4.B. According to Art. 31, para. from
The Constitution:

"Everyone accused of a crime should be brought to justice
authority within the legally prescribed period. ”

This text is definitely irrelevant to the content of Article 53, paragraph from
ZINP, as it is its provision that makes the categories incompatible
"Accused of a crime" and "candidate for MP". Obviously
the constitutional text means "anyone" who by virtue of the act
right, can be charged with a crime, not "everyone", even when the law
forbids this.

3.5. A certain concern in terms of human rights is the statement of
the submitter of the request that the provision of art. 53, para. from ZINP ”can seriously
hinder the prosecution of perpetrators of crimes, in this
number of serious crimes ”According to Article 31, paragraph 3 of the Constitution
"The accused shall be presumed innocent until the contrary is established by an entry into force
sentence ”. Therefore, "perpetrators of crimes", within the meaning of
The Constitution are only persons who have already been convicted. Obviously the criminal
persecution against them cannot be difficult, as it is over
with an effective sentence.

The concern from the quoted opinion comes not so much from the legal one
its paradoxicality, as much as the readiness expressed in it by the candidates for the people
representatives, and rpop! to be qualified as potential criminals.

I believe that this is the "argument" of the Prosecutor General of the Republic
Bulgaria, in itself, proves that in the conditions of the post-totalitarian state it does not
there are unnecessary additional guarantees for the rule of law and the People's Law
assembly as a legislative body.

In the above context, I consider that the request of the Prosecutor General for
declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para of ZINP should be
rejected as regards the criminal integrity of the candidates for
MPs and could only be respected in respect of
immunity of their advocates.

Arguments for the public necessity and justification of the privileges
of the candidates could not be defended with the same persuasiveness
in respect of advocates. Therefore, with regard to their immunity, c
in accordance with the request of the Prosecutor General, priority should be given to
the constitutional principle of equality of citizens before the law. By
In the case of advocates, this principle is not so directly confronted with
the supremacy of Parliament, popular sovereignty, the separation of powers, and
freedom of suffrage.

TU.CONCLUSION.

Based on the above, I consider that the Constitutional Court of the Republic
Bulgaria could declare unconstitutional the provision of Article 53, para. 1

of the ZINP only regarding the words “and the advocates”, and the rest of the request of
The Attorney General should be dismissed.
| SUBJECT: the requests of a group / 56 / MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly and a court panel of
W Department of the Supreme Administrative Court
to declare unconstitutional
The Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners
in the Republic of Bulgaria / prom. SG No. 108/2000 /

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The demands for declaring the unconstitutionality of
The Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria were raised by a group / 56 / MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly and composition of the W Department of the Supreme

Administrative Court.
By order of 13.02.20001 the Constitutional

the court allowed the requests for examination on the merits and constituted it
the Minister of the Interior as one of the stakeholders

on the case.

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE REQUESTS:
The demands of the group of MPs and the judiciary
composition of the Supreme Administrative Court are identical insofar as

have a common subject. They are made by fit constitutional subjects under
the meaning of art. 150, para. | and para 2 of the Constitution. Their consideration is
from the competence of the Constitutional Court according to art. 149, para 1, item 2
of the Constitution and Art. 17, para 1 of the Constitutional Court Act.

THE ESSENCE OF THE REQUESTS:

I consider that, although admissible, both requests are
unfounded insofar as the Law on the National Assembly adopted by the National Assembly
interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria no
unconstitutional. My legal considerations in support
of this opinion are the following:

REGARDING THEIR FORMAL MOTIVATIONS:

In general, the invoked ones are reduced to the statement
to the petitioners that the National Assembly cannot give authentically
interpretation of its legislation.

Indeed, the current Constitution of
Since 1991, the Republic of Bulgaria has not explicitly determined which body
can interpret the laws and possibly by what procedure, unlike
of the Constitution of 1971, which by Article 93, item 8 empowered
The Council of State to make binding on all interpretations of
the laws. Before that, in the period 1948 - 1967 significant
interpretive activity was performed by the Presidium of the People's Party
assembly, with which he contributed to the clarification of the laws, cf.
"Interpretative Decisions of the Presidium of the National Assembly, 1948-
1967 ", compiled by D. Popov /.

Despite the lack of explicit regulation, it can not
denied the right of the National Assembly to give an authentic interpretation of
the laws. In this sense is also Decision G 3 of 03.04.1992 of
The Constitutional Court under k. d. He 30/91

This position is definitely supported by a number of recognized and
respected representatives of the Bulgarian legal doctrine
such as Prof. Vitali Tajer, Prof. Boris Spasov, Prof. Stefan Stoychev,
Prof. Maria Pavlova and others who find enough undoubted
grounds in the classical general theory of law. The last most
little can be influenced by the arguments put forward by the applicants for
the diverse and dynamic representation of political parties
in the ten years since the adoption of the Constitution of
Republic of Bulgaria The argument of
claimants that the legal possibility to exercise authentic

interpretation by the National Assembly leads to compromising
legal certainty and serious prejudice to the principle of separation of rights
authorities as a guarantee of modern democratic society.

I believe that all constitutional principles should
be considered in their totality and interconnectedness. Developed
from the applicants a thesis that perceives the interpretation of legal norms as
a function inherent only in the judiciary contradicts precisely that
the principles of democracy and separation of powers,
proclaimed by the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. Perception
on this thesis would put the same bodies above the legislative and
the executive branch. The principle adopted in our legal system for
admission of different types ”interpretation is an expression of
the constitutionally established principles of division and
equality of powers and guarantees the balance of implementation
of their powers.

Therefore, the opinion of the applicants that
the legislator's right to interpret the laws himself is “hostile to
constitutionalism ”and is a serious threat to the separation of powers
as a guarantee of democracy. " All pointed in this direction
we consider political arguments to be irrelevant to what has been raised before
Constitutional Court request.

Indeed, the Constitution entrusts the judiciary
a function of exercising supreme judicial oversight over the exact and
uniform application of the laws of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
The Supreme Administrative Court (Articles 124 and 125 of the Constitution).
Carrying out this activity, the highest judicial bodies
in practice they give a formal general or casual interpretation, which they do not
derogates from the right of the National Assembly as the author of the respective
normative act to give an authentic interpretation.

The National Assembly can give an authentic interpretation of
the laws. It could be assumed that it would be the most correct interpretation.
This opinion belongs to Prof. Stefan Stoychev / see
"Constitutional Law of the Republic of Bulgaria", lectures, Sofia,
1993, p.284 /. The interpretative act does not contain new legal ones
norms. It only gives explanations of how to understand the meaning given by
legislator. The law of interpretation generally comes into force from
the moment when the interpreted normative act came into force.

By the way, I believe that the authentic interpretation of
the law is a power which the Constitution has preserved only and
only for the National Assembly. It is a manifestation of the legislature,

inherent only in this state body. The goal is to reveal exactly
the content of legal thought. And to be able to
apply and follow the laws exactly, you need to know their exact
content - this is what is achieved through interpretation.

The purpose of the interpretation is the normative act as a source
of the law in which the rule-making will is expressed, objectified in
the provisions of the act. The common belief in science is that it is interpreted
the legal norm as part of the source of law. On interpretation
subject to any legal rule, not only vague, but also by the authority,
who issued it. The subject of interpretation may be the Constitution,
laws and regulations.

The interpretation of legal norms is extremely large
theoretical and practical significance. The correct interpretation with
prerequisite for the norms to be able to achieve the goals they want
assign, and perform their official function.

Prof. Vitali Tajer accepts that with the disclosure of the exact
meaning of the legal norm is obtained knowledge about it, which must be
popularizes, i.e. to become public in order to be able to
build such a legal consciousness that observes the rule of law / cf.
"Civil Law of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, General Part, Title D", Sofia, 1972 /. When
the creation of a law there is a unity between the will of the law and
the will of the legislator. It must not be torn
the legislator is obliged to watch over this unity. He monitors how the legal
norm performs its official functions. Hold it in force only if
corresponds to his understandings during its application. If he deviates
the law enforcement authority from these understandings, the legislator intervenes.
The legal norm must be applied according to its exact reason.
The interpretation is based on the irrebuttable assumption that every norm is
appropriate. The expediency of the norm is determined by its
acceptance, then it is simply applied.

The official interpretation is given by a state body authorized
for this by law, the interpretation being binding on those
who apply the legal norm. It is normative and casual.
Normative interpretation, on the other hand, is also an authentic interpretation
from other state bodies, including judicial ones. Authentic interpretation
is what is given by the body that issued the interpreted act. Who is right
to issue regulations, he has the right to interpret them when
find this appropriate.

Therefore, in the present case it is authentic
normative interpretation of the legal norm of art. 47 of the FRBA, which has

generally binding action similar to the legal norm itself.
It is subject to the specific provision, in view of which it is issued for
clarifying the meaning of which it serves. That is why the interpreted legal norm
is not independent. According to the doctrine, in essence the authentic
normative interpretation is a type of rule-making activity. The reasoning is
given in the form of a law, in compliance with the basic principle that
the interpretation is made with a new legal norm of the same degree. By
In principle, the laws are adopted by the National Assembly - the state
a body to which the Constitution has recognized such competence.

The need for interpretation of the legal norm is
concludes in the manifested weaknesses of the law - inaccuracies, ambiguities,
contradictions that can be eliminated by the normative
interpretation. In all cases, this facilitates the achievement of
the purpose pursued by law. Clarifying the legal function
norm ensures its accurate application by the judicial authorities. More
moreover, the normative interpretation is called to bring unity in
the practice of law enforcement.

Authentic normative interpretation is always performed
after the issuance of the interpreted norm. However, the interpretive law exists
reverse action - ex ps, at the time of issuance of the interpreted
legal norm, such as the provision of Art. 50, para. | from the LNA. This
requirement is met in the specific case, due to which the complaints
of “the applicants in this direction appear unfounded. After
publication and entry into force, the interpretative provision should be
comprehends and applies in the sense clarified by the interpretative law. It's clear that
it can cause interference because it also applies to hanging
disputes and court decisions that have entered into force, but this cannot
served as a ground to deny the right of the National Assembly to
gives an authentic interpretation.

It follows from the principle of equality before the law that similar
cases must be dealt with equally. In this regard, I note that
the bodies of the judiciary can give casually / and not normatively /
interpretation of the legal norm, officially objectified in writing in
the issued judicial acts. However, this interpretation is mandatory
only for those persons who are interested in the individual case, ie not for
all. General interpretation is given in the interpretative decisions of the General
meeting of judges of the Supreme Administrative Court and the General
meeting of the civil colleges of the Supreme Court of Cassation. In this
connection should be borne in mind that the concept of "law enforcement" in
Bulgarian legislation and legal theory is understood in a narrow and c

broad sense. It is law enforcement in the narrow sense that is carried out by
the judiciary and the executive, in contrast to
the authentic interpretation given by the National Assembly and se
refers to "law enforcement" in a broad sense.

Adopting the interpretative law subject to the present
constitutional proceedings, the legislator used the funds
of the functional / logical / and historical-political interpretation.
By means of the first the meaning of the legal norm of art. 47 is clarified
LFRB by clarifying its official function, defined in
its acceptance. With the latter, the legislator has substantiated the answer of
the following questions: on what legal idea is the norm based, what is the purpose of
her, under what conditions it was issued, what was the reason for it
acceptance, what is its original origin and what political
considerations have guided the legislator. The National Assembly is
the body that has determined the immediate and ultimate goals of the law -
timely and effective protection of extremely important public
relations related to national security as a priority
value. They are a means of guaranteeing national security
The constitution and laws aimed at preventing targeted actions
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity of the country and the unity of
nation (elements of external security), to ignite
national, ethnic or religious enmity (elements of internal
security). The meaning of the norm of art. 47 of the FRBA is assessed precisely in c
the light of these goals. Question of observance of the Constitution by
it is up to the relevant state authorities to prevent such actions,
which is also achieved by revealing the exact meaning of the interpreted
norm dictated by the recital to bring full clarity and
certainty in its sense.

Based on the above, I consider that the Act on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria no
may be declared unconstitutional by the
applicants formal grounds.

ON THEIR ESSENTIAL MOTIVATIONS:

The essential> considerations of
the petitioners, according to which with the Interpretative Law the National Assembly
introduces new material and procedural norms.

These considerations cannot therefore be accepted,
that the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA is not a legislative act, no
normative content and does not change or supplement the interpreted norm. C
The interpretative law clarifies the will of the legislator to determine
coercive administrative measures directly related to
the security of the country, for which the main text of Art. 47 of the FRBA
provides for non-appealability.

In addition, according to the text of Art. 46 of the LNA, at
clarifying the meaning of a provision must take into account
its connection with other texts from the same normative act or from others
regulations, even those relating to other branches of
objective law. The principle of interpretation should also apply here
through context. This principle requires that all provisions be interpreted
one through the other, in the context of the whole text, bearing in mind
their systematic place in the part, the chapter, the law and their ratio
with any other member.

In this regard, the determination of a coercive
administrative measure as a measure directly related to
security of the country should be done on the basis of
the systematic, logical and broad interpretation of ZANN,
ZAP and ZCHRB by applying the method of induction and establishment
the cumulative presence of the following requirements:

-the administrative act by which the compulsory is applied
an administrative measure has been issued by a competent authority,

- the administrative act to be issued in the established by
law form;

- the administrative act has been issued in compliance with
the substantive provisions of the law, which implicitly includes in
indication of the legal basis for the issuance of
the administrative act, one of which may be Art. 10, para. 1, vol. | from
HRF - with his actions the foreigner "has endangered security
or the interests of the Bulgarian state or for whom there is evidence that
acts against the security of the country ”;

- the administrative act to correspond to the purpose of the law.

According to the provisions of Art. 22 and Art. 23 of ZANN, for
prevention and cessation of administrative violations,
as well as to prevent the harmful effects of them, can be
apply coercive administrative measures as in a special law
or a decree regulates the cases when they can be applied

the administrative measures, their type, the authorities implementing them, and
the manner of their application, as well as the procedure for their appeal.

When the declaration of intent to impose coercion
administrative measure is expressed in writing, then by its legal nature
is an individual administrative act within the meaning of the ZAP.
According to Art. 1, para. 1 of the Administrative Procedure Act, the same regulates the proceedings under
issuance, “appeal and enforcement of individual
administrative acts, insofar as they are not in another law or decree
established special rules.

In view of all the above, the request is also unfounded
of the 56 MPs and a member of the Third Department of
The Supreme Administrative Court for announcement
the unconstitutionality of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA,
motivated by the statement that the text of the Interpretative Law is
introduce new legal norms.

The other essential consideration is also unfounded,
argued by the applicants that the second sentence of the sole article of
The interpretative law contradicts the provisions of Art. 56 and Art. 120
of the Constitution, as it only clarifies the meaning of the will of
the legislator, expressed in Art. 47 of the FRBA, and in no way
contradicts the proclaimed constitutional right to protection of everyone
a citizen when his rights have been violated or threatened, or
legitimate interests, as well as the general principle of appealability of
administrative acts before the courts.

The Constitutional Legislator with the provision of Art.
para 2 of the Constitution has introduced an exception to the proclaimed principle
to exercise control over the legality of acts and actions of
administrative authorities, by removing it from its scope
a certain category of administrative acts explicitly indicated by
law.

Interpreting the provisions of Article 56 and of
120, para 2 of the Constitution, I come to the conclusion that the norm of
Article 56 refers to the right to protection as a basic constitutional
law in the framework of a constitutionally justified and admissible process,
i.e. insofar as the legislator has not excluded a certain category
acts from the circle of those subject to judicial control. On the other hand, for
the legislator has “established the ability to judge which
administrative acts may be excluded from the scope of
the appealed.

In support of the above is the decision Ho5 / 18.02.1997. he
кдХо 25/96г. of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria, which
notes that the possibility of excluding certain categories
administrative acts of judicial review is admissible “only then,
when this exception does not prejudice the constitutionally recognized
fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens, or where another, higher,
but an explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be
priority protected (such is, for example, the sphere of the national
security) ”The norm of art. 47, para! The FRBA creates an exception to
the rule of judicial review of administrative acts in so far as
with the envisaged coercive measures the legislator aims to ensure
state security. The term "security" should be understood in
its attitude towards the state and the functioning of its
organs.

The opinion of the applicants is unfounded,> that
The interpretative law comes into conflict with the one proclaimed in Art. B, para. from
European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
the right to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by
an independent and impartial tribunal established in accordance with the law.

The norm of art. 6, para! ECHICOS sets requirements for
a fair trial without absolutizing the judicial appeal. Each
a state party to the Convention has a certain freedom to
realization of goals permissible by the Constitution and the law.
The Bulgarian constitutional legislator within the framework provided in
the convention opportunity has created the text of Article 120, paragraph 2 of the CRB. In this
Decision LHo5 / 18.02.1997 under cd. 25/96 on
The Constitutional Court, according to which the introduction of a restriction on
the appealability of a certain category of administrative acts under
court order, for which this is provided by law, does not contradict
the provisions of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; and
the analogous provision of Art. 6, vol. | of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
human rights and fundamental freedoms, adopted by the Council of Europe,
ratified by a law adopted by the National Assembly on July 31, 1992 - SG, iss. 66 of
14.08.1992 / promulgated, SG, no. 80 of 2.10.1992, in force since 7.09.1992 /,
which is a basic international legal document for the protection of the rights of

man.
The provision of Art. 6 of the CPIC defines the general

regulatory framework for creating an environment for effective remedies
of civil rights and fundamental freedoms, within the civil
or criminal proceedings. As for the administrative

proceedings, the European Court of Human Rights allows
a wider discretion of states in determining
"the effectiveness of the pool of resources" (Leander v
Sweden 1987). The Court further clarifies that the right to effective
remedies can be "subject to inherent
contextual limitations "in cases of national considerations
security.

In addition to the "above", the comparative
historical review of the Bulgarian and foreign legislation
indicates the presence of a sufficiently wide range and for example
variety of admissible by the Constitution and legislation
criteria for the legislative definition of acts excluded from
judicial control. There are some basic criteria such as
material, institutional, functional, procedural, as well as
criterion based on the specific content and subject of
the administrative act. In order to clarify the “category of
the administrative acts, which in the sense of the provision of art. 47
of the FRBA are excluded from judicial review, the legislator in
The Interpretative Law has chosen one of the above criteria -
indication of the legal basis for issuing the administrative act.

Based on the above> arguments> for
non-appealability of this category of acts, as well as due to the fact that Art.
47, para 2 of the FRBA, requires indication only of the legal basis for
issuance of orders under para. 1, I believe that there is no
legal possibility for the court to collect evidence of the facts and
the circumstances that motivated the issuance of this category of orders,
in so far as its law enforcement activity covers only
verification of the legal basis. Therefore it cannot be
shared the opinion of the claimants that the fourth sentence of
The interpretative law contradicts Art. 8, Art. 117, para 2 and Art. 121, para 2 of
The Constitution.

The request also develops the thesis that with the third sentence of the article
solely of the Interpretative Law, the legislator gives instructions to the court
how and on what legal grounds to decide the cases, “which is in
contradiction with art. 4, para 1, art. 8, para 1, art. 117, art. 120, para 1, art. 121, para! and
para 2 of the Constitution. The cited constitutional provisions do not
support the request, on the contrary, are arguments for his
rejection. The independence of the judiciary is by no means
infringes by the Interpretative Law because it neither commands nor does
instruct the court on how to decide cases, uphold or reject the appeal, a

has clarified the legal situation that gives rise to the interpreted legal
norm in view of its uniform and accurate application.

At the same time, the descriptions in the request are puzzling
hypothetical case for issuance of a null and void administrative act.
According to the plaintiffs, despite its flaw, it would have legal consequences
for the addressee, and because he falls into the category of acts,
unappealable, the addressee would be deprived of the right to
refer to a court to declare the act null and void. It should be
noted that according to the basic principles of law, null and void
acts do not give rise and can never give rise to legal consequences. IN
Bulgarian and world legal doctrine (Prof. Dr. K. Lazarov,
"Invalidity of administrative acts", Sofia, 1998)
takes the view that “there is no difference between the insignificant and
non-existent administrative acts, as one act is
non-existent when it lacks such an essential element that it does not
need to be canceled, it can only be found that in
there is really no act. " All this can rightly be
say about the null and void acts.

It should also be borne in mind that there is none
legal impediment to the addressee of such an act to use the legal one
opportunity provided for in the State Liability Act for
damages caused to citizens. According to Art. 2, para. 2 of this law,
“When the damages are caused by a null and void administrative act or by
illegal action or inaction, the nullity of the act, respectively
the illegality of the act or omission is established
by the court before which the claim for compensation has been filed ”.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Please disregard what the group has done
MPs and members of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court requests for javan
the unconstitutionality of the Wi Interpretation Act
for foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria.
DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In connection with your constitutional ruling of 13 February 2001
Case He 2/2001, by which you admitted the merits of the request of 56
MPs from XXXUS National Assembly and a panel of judges from Sh
Division "of" the Supreme "Administrative Court for" announcement 0 for
unconstitutional all provisions of the Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, prom. SG, issue 108 of December 29, 2000
d, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as an interested party provides

the following opinion:

1. Legal doctrine defines interpretation as a process of precision
clarification of the legislative will, expressed in the legal norm. In case of
the interpretation comes from the body that issued the relevant normative act, then we are talking about
authentic interpretation of the law, ie in the most general terms it can be summarized that by

thus the body that has the rule-making competence to adopt

the relevant norm has clarified its actual content, which due to
one reason or another has remained unclear to the judiciary and
law enforcement authorities.

In Art. 84, para of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria regulates the powers of
The National Assembly, as indisputable is the fact that they are not listed
exhaustively. Article 84, paragraph 1, item 1 states that the National Assembly “accepts,
amends, supplements and repeals the laws ”, that is, in essence, this text states that
it is authorized by the Constitution through laws to adopt universally binding
rules of conduct to regulate the relevant public relations,
according to his will formed in a strictly defined order. There is no such power
delegated by the Constitution to either of the other two authorities.

On the other hand, in Art. 124 and art. 125 of the Constitution are regulated
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court for
exercising supreme judicial supervision over the accurate and uniform application of.
the laws. According to Art. 84, para 1, item | and Art. 95, item 3 of the Judiciary Act,
the general meeting of the respective board of the Supreme Court of Cassation,
respectively of the Supreme Administrative Court rules with interpretatives
decisions in case of incorrect or contradictory practice of the courts. In this
hypothesis we are again faced with a case of official interpretation of the legal
norms, but performed by a judicial authority in the implementation of
the competencies assigned to him.

It is alleged that the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Aliens Act c
The Republic of Bulgaria enters into contradiction with the provisions of Art. 8 of the Constitution
principle of separation of powers, because clarifying the exact meaning of
legal norms is a judicial function inherent in higher justice
bodies that are independent within the meaning of Art. 117, para 2 of the Constitution. It follows
to bear in mind, however, that the possibility of the National Assembly to carry out.
An authentic interpretation of its akgos derives directly from the provision of Art. 84,
para 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria as an expression of its exclusive competence to.
creates by law generally binding legal norms of high order, respectively yes.
clarifies how they should be applied. This power is immanent
embedded in the rule-making activity itself, due to which the legislator did not consider

it is necessary to include it explicitly in the text of the Constitution.

As for the indicated possibility of the colleges of the SAC and the SCC to
pronounce with interpretative decisions in case of incorrect or contradictory practice,
then their activity derives from their hierarchical place in the system of
courts and differs from the authentic interpretation in its essence and
functions. In one case, the rule-making body clarifies its actual
will at the time of adoption of the relevant act, while in the other hypothesis is
there is a mental activity for secondary clarification of the will of the legislator, p
the help of the institutes of law, of the logical, grammatical and others
rules. Authentic interpretation aims to materialize
the actual will of the authority which issued the act in the relevant adequate text,
while in the other case the aim is to ensure the accurate and uniform application of
laws by the courts for reasons in the judiciary. In this
meaning precisely the denial of the right of the National Assembly to exercise
interpretation of their own acts would run counter to
the principle of separation of powers enshrined in the Constitution, as
as the opposite means to enable the judiciary along the way
of interpretation to replace the actual will of the legislator, that is, to
creates new legal norms - a power that it does not have under
Constitution. Hence a constitutional guarantee against a possible one
abuse of the right to an authentic interpretation of the laws should be
seeks in the powers of the> Constitutional Court to> establish
unconstitutionality of these acts, and not in the very denial of the right
of authentic interpretation.

2. With regard to the allegation of contradiction of the Interpretative Law with
Article 6, item 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Rights
freedoms (ECHR), it should be emphasized that according to this text, any person, under
determination of his civil rights and obligations or in the presence of
any criminal charge against him is entitled to a fair and
public hearing of his case within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial
a court established in accordance with the law. According to the case law of
European Court of Human Rights, the scope of this provision is
limited to the cases where the court hears disputes concerning rights or
obligations of a private civil nature (agge: Kshrevep of 16 July 1971

(d) or on the merits of criminal charges. Both the text and

the practice of applying Article 6, paragraph of the ECHR relate exclusively to
civil and criminal proceedings. In rare cases / related to rights,
whose effect occurs in the private civil law sphere such as the right to
property or right to practice a certain profession or activity /,
The European Court of Human Rights has held that Article 6 is also applicable to
administrative proceedings Its applicability in these rare cases is
conditioned by the cumulative presence of at least two conditions, namely: a) c
the national legal order provides for the possibility of challenging this right
and 6) the signs of a private civil nature of the right to have
obvious predominance over the signs of public law character. For example,
due to the lack of these conditions, Article 6 of the ECHR is inapplicable in the field of
emigration law or in respect of tax proceedings / age Aree from
17.12.1976 /

On an even greater basis, as far as regulated by the disputes
interpretive law public relations are related to the application of
coercive administrative measures against foreigners for reasons of
national security, it follows that the provision of Article 6 para is from the ECHR
not applicable in this case.

3. With regard to the allegation that the fourth and fifth sentences of Article
only Interpretative law frustrate the right of appeal of citizens, follows
to note that the exclusion of the possibility for the court to collect evidence of
the facts and circumstances which motivated the issuing authority derive from
the exclusion of the possibility for the Court to assess and rule on
the essence of the grounds for issuing the order. In this regard, relevant
are the arguments presented by us in item 2. In the same context, it should be emphasized that
ECHR provisions, as well as the case law of the European Court of Human Rights
do not obstruct the domestic legal order of the States Parties
The Convention excludes judicial review and adjudication on the merits of
the measure imposed by an administrative act for reasons of national
security. This fact does not mean that the foreign nationals concerned are
completely deprived of the general right to defense. As noted by the Constitutional
court in its decision Ho. 18 of 14.11.1997 on constitutional case 12/97,
“The provision of art. 120, para 2 sh Be of the Constitution does not exclude the right of

the courts to rule on the nullity of the unappealable

administrative acts. and therefore the fourth and fifth sentences of Article
the only of the disputed interpretative law are not in conflict with

the constitutionally established right to protection of citizens.
OPINION

of the Committee on Legal Affairs and

anti-corruption legislation

SUBJECT: The ruling of the Constitutional Court
of 13.02.2001, received on 15.02.2001, with attached requests of
group of MPs and the Supreme Administrative
court by which the National Assembly was constituted as a party to
CD Me 2/2001 to establish the unconstitutionality of
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria / promulgated, SG, iss. 108/2000 /.

At a regular meeting held on 22.02.2001, the Commission
on legal issues and anti-corruption legislation discussed
The ruling of the Constitutional Court of 13.02.2001, received
on 15.02.2001, with attached requests of a group of people

representatives of the Supreme Administrative Court, which
The National Assembly is constituted as a party under c.d. Me 2/2001
to establish the unconstitutionality of the Law on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria
/ promulgated, SG, no. 108/2000 /.

There are two main ones before the Constitutional Court
the question.

1. Can the National Assembly give obligatorily
interpretation of a law or legal provisions? About this issue
The Constitutional Court has already ruled in Decision Me 2 of 1994
and by Decision Me 13 of 1996. The Court held that the People's
assembly may give mandatory interpretation by adoption
of an interpretative law by the order of adoption of the regular laws.

In the procedural case, the established procedure for the adoption of a law is
observed and therefore there is no violation of the Constitution.

2. “According to Art. 120 of> the Constitution all
administrative acts may be appealed with exception
of those for whom the appeal is excluded by law.
The Constitutional Court has already had cases to rule that with
law can not be thwarted by appeals against related acts
with fundamental human rights and freedoms. In this situation
the only question is - does it represent the possibility to be
expelled foreign citizen from the country when
his behavior threatens her security, a violation of
basic human rights and freedoms. In our opinion, every country has
sovereign right to refuse entry into the country, respectively to
expels from it persons who endanger public order and
national security. In this way, no one disputes the right
of the state to deny entry visas to foreigners. | By argument
and utop she has the right to expel foreign nationals for whom
in the prescribed manner can be considered dangerous for

public order and national security. This right of

the state is explicitly established in Art. 1, item 2 of Protocol Me 7 to
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

In this situation, there is no doubt that the Act
interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria / SG, iss. 108/2000 / is completely constitutional.

The Committee on Legal Affairs and
anti-corruption legislation considers that the request under c.d. Me
2/2001 is unfounded and unfounded and should not be
accepts.

The opinion was adopted by 7 votes to 1 with 1 votes

"abstainer". paradise.
Gentlemen judges,

By order of 13 February 2001 on “the above
constitutional case The Constitutional Court has allowed the request to be considered
of 56 MPs from the 38th National Assembly and a court panel from Sh
Division "of" the Supreme "Administrative Court" to declare 0 for
unconstitutional all provisions of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria / SG, iss. 108 of 29 December 2000

1. The first request raises the question of admissibility
Is it up to the National Assembly to pass laws to interpret existing ones?
laws.

It is pointed out that the provision of Art. 84 of the Constitution provides that
The National Assembly adopts, amends and repeals laws, but does not envisage them
The National Assembly to be able to interpret the laws. It is also pointed out that with Art. 8 from
The Constitution establishes the principle of separation of powers ... And according to Art.
117, para. 2, the judiciary shall be independent in the exercise of its assignment
judicial function. And the latter derives from “enshrined in Art. 124 and
125, para. | from the Constitution the competences of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
The Supreme Administrative Court to exercise supreme judicial supervision over
implementation of accurate and uniform application of the laws ", it is said literally
in exactly the same way in the two requests referred to the Constitutional Court.

The Supreme Bar Council does not have a unanimous opinion on this position
question.

On the one hand, the understanding expressed by the importers of both is accepted
requests for declaring the unconstitutionality of the Law for interpretation of art.
47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria. Support this understanding
points out that the National Assembly is not authorized to give so-called authentic interpretation of

laws, as such a power is not provided for in the Constitution for
unlike the previous Bulgarian constitutions, in which the issue was
explicitly settled. In the constitution of the Kingdom of Bulgaria in Art. 44 was
provided that the National Assembly had the right to interpret the true meaning of
every law. "According to the constitutions of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the power to give"
binding on all interpretations of the laws »belonged respectively to
The Presidium of the National Assembly / Art. 35, item 4 of the Constitution of 1947 / i
of the State Council / Art. 93, item 8 of the Constitution of 1971 /.

According to another understanding, the silence of the Constitution on
power of the National Assembly to interpret the laws adopted by it no
means that it cannot interpret its own will. It is not in the Constitution
assigned to another constitutional body to give an authentic interpretation of
the laws. There is no ban on the National Assembly doing this. Therefore not
there is no constitutional obstacle for the National Assembly to interpret itself
the laws created by him. By the way, the term authentic interpretation means that
it is given precisely by the one who has expressed the legislative will in one way or another
degree vague to explain exactly what he meant.

The Constitution does not instruct the supreme courts to give
mandatory for all interpretation of the laws. The judicial function most
generally speaking, it is necessary to resolve a specific legal dispute, to impose it
a specific sanction for a specific offense and in a word to rule on
specific issues referred to a judicial authority.
The judicial function does not consist in creating universally valid norms
for state bodies, for institutions and departments and for all legal and
individuals. That would mean that the judiciary is
assigned legislative functions. And this is not provided by Art. 120 and art. 125, para. 1
of the Constitution. In these provisions it is said only that the supreme courts.
exercise supreme judicial oversight over the accurate and uniform application of laws
from all courts. Therefore, since the lower courts are
ruled their acts appealed to the Supreme Courts, the latter under
the force of the control exercised by them according to the judicial procedure laws
rule on the correctness of these acts, seeking to harmonize
case law with its decisions - confirmatory or revocable. IN
however, in no case does the Constitution empower supreme courts without them
referred to a specific litigation, to give universal validity to the judicial authorities
instructions on the interpretation and application of laws. That would mean to be
limited freedom of internal judicial conviction. It is the main one
a prerequisite for the independence of the judiciary, which is independence not only
in relation to the other authorities, but it is also a hierarchical independence.
The opposite understanding contradicts precisely the one established by art. 117, para. изр.1 от
The Constitution is a principle relied on by the petitioners.
This provision in its second sentence provides that judges, judicial
jurors, prosecutors and investigators are subject only to the law; i.e.,
the courts are obliged to obey only the instructions of interpretation
and the application of the law given by the Supreme Court of Cassation in particular

case, which was returned to them for reconsideration.

essentially in the light. of the above
the provisions of Art. 97 of the Judiciary Act, c
feature of its para 2, and art. 45 of the Law on the Supreme Administrative Court. On
practice with these provisions are assigned to the supreme legislative courts
functions.

2. As for the discussion of> the content of the self
interpretive law, we find that the claims are pointless, as is the case
is also the law itself following the decision Ho 4 of 23 February 2001 under
constitutional case He 12/2000 of the Constitutional Court. With this decision,
as reported, the request of 55 MPs from the 38th was rejected
National Assembly. to declare the unconstitutionality of Art. 47, para. | from
The Law on Foreigners of the Republic of Bulgaria and on the Establishment of
its incompatibility with the provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
human rights and fundamental freedoms. The meaning of this legal provision is
clear - the orders under section | are not subject to appeal from Chapter U of the law, p
which coercive administrative measures are imposed immediately
related to the security of the country In the cited decision of
The Constitutional Court set out the reasons in favor of understanding that this
provision is not unconstitutional and is not inconsistent with the provisions of
European Convention. In this regard, we will only allow ourselves to add that
according to art. 12, item 3 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights / c
force for Bulgaria from March 23, 1976 - SG, iss. 43 of 28 May 1976 / the right of
freedom of movement may be restricted by a law to protect
national security, public order, public health and morals or
the rights and freedoms of others.
DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

With a request on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution a group of people
representatives of the XXXUS National Assembly dispute
the constitutionality of the newly adopted Law for amendment and
amendment to the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State
security (SG, issue 24/2001). The request contains arguments for
unconstitutionality of a law, in view of the procedure of its adoption,
as well as those which justify a contradiction with the basic law of
separate provisions thereof.

Given the fact that the grounds for contradiction with
The Constitution of individual provisions of the disputed law on its own
essence are arguments of expediency, we find that they cannot be
considered as grounds on which to judge
the constitutionality of the individual legal provisions. that's why
we do not support the view of the alleged contradiction with
The Constitution of individual provisions of the newly adopted law.

In support of our understanding, we want to point out the fact that
the affiliation of members of the government to one or another party
does not result in a contradiction with the Constitution of formed by
executive committees that exist and carry out their
activity on the basis of the provisions of the law.

In its request, the group of MPs claims a contradiction
of the said law with the Constitution, alleging violations in the procedure

of its vote, which is regulated in the Rules of Organization and
the activity of the National Assembly (Rules of Procedure). Undoubtedly the observance of
individual legal norms is one of the characteristics of the rule of law,
but not every contradiction with a legal norm results in a contradiction with
The Constitution.

As it is known to the court at the first vote the bills are
discuss in full and the MPs rule on the main ones
issues of regulated public relations (Article 66 of the Regulations). Here
why the number of texts of the future law of this first vote and that of
the adoption of the bill in its final form, after the vote
text by text, has no legal significance for violation of the Regulations and without
no doubt about the Constitution either.

Violations of the Regulations, if any, have no consequence
mandatory violation of the law.

In addition, these violations can only be identified by
stenographic protocols, which are official documents and have
probative value for the statements, circumstances and
findings, including the number of MPs present
(quorum), for the number of those who voted "for", "against" or "abstained", etc.,
which findings can be made only by the National Assembly.
The Constitutional Court cannot open proceedings against them
contestation.

In assessing the constitutionality of the procedure in
voting and adoption of the acts of the National Assembly the court should
based solely on the data in the transcripts of the meetings
of the National Assembly.

These are our arguments to assume that there are no grounds for
declaring the newly adopted law unconstitutional in

its integrity. >
OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on

constitutional case Mo 7 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of March 29, 2001, we were constituted as
interested party in the constitutional case Me 7 for 2001, initiated
at the request of 54 MPs from the 38th National Assembly for
establishing entirely the> unconstitutionality of the Law on
amendment of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former
State Security (AIS ZDDBDS), promulgated in the State Gazette, issue
24 of 2001, or alternatively> to establish
the unconstitutionality of 8 6, 8 7 his part, with which art.
Agichl. 4e, 83, 85, 88, 821, 823 and 25 of the law.

1. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of the Amendments and Supplements to the VAT Act with Article
4, para. 1, art. 87, para. Tichl. 88, para. 1 of the Constitution

The request alleges that the AIS ZDDBDS contradicts Art. 4, para. That
The Constitution, as its adoption violated Art. 11, para. 1 of
The Law on Normative Acts (LNA) and Art. 68 Art. 69, para. 2 of the Regulations
for the organization and activity of the National Assembly (PODNS).

The violation of Art. 11, para. 1 of the LNA is justified by the fact that
The Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security
(ZDDBDS), which is amended and supplemented, had 14 members located on 3
pages, while the draft of the National Assembly, originally submitted to the National Assembly
ZID ZDDBDS had 22 paragraphs, located on 7 pages, and the adopted one
was three times larger in volume than originally imported and was
located on 17 pages.

The violation of PODNS is justified by the fact that between the first and
second reading and after the deadlines for proposals was tabled
practically a new bill, which in principle differed from the adopted one
at the first vote and was “made by someone unknown and imported by someone unknown
whom ”. The fact that the bill was new was evident from its new title.

The Council of Ministers is not the submitter of the draft of the Law on Public Procurement Act,
therefore we do not have accurate information about the content
of the bill originally submitted to the National Assembly and
the amendments made between the first and second votes in
him. However, we believe that the above arguments of the group of people
representatives can not substantiate the conclusion of unconstitutionality of
of the law.

Possible violations in the legislative process could
lead to unconstitutionality of the law only if they are violations
of constitutional norms establishing requirements for the manner of
adoption of laws. When the law is passed in compliance with
the requirements of art. 87 Art. 88 of the Constitution, it cannot be argued that
violation or non - compliance with other procedural rules under
the adoption of the normative acts, established in LNA and PODNS, leads to
unconstitutional, as it was a violation of the principle of
the rule of law established in Art. 4, para. 1. The purpose of the LNA is to create
rules for the drafting of regulations relevant to
the application and interpretation of the acts. Article 11, para. 1 of the LNA is legal, and

non-constitutional norm and non-compliance with this text in the adoption of

a law cannot be a ground for unconstitutionality of the law.
Perceiving the opposite would mean that any special law would
was unconstitutional as adopted in violation of the constitutional
principle of the rule of law, as it establishes deviations
of the general order established by an effective law.

A conclusion in a similar sense follows from the reasons in Decision Me 5 of
1998 on constitutional case Co 2 for 1998, in which the Constitutional
the court held that:

“The assessment of constitutionality ... according to Art. 149, para. 1,
item 2 of the Constitution can be given only in view of this,
whether constitutional provisions and not other normative ones have been violated
acts introducing additional requirements and procedures (Decision Mo 3
since 1991 under k. e. Me 17 of 1991)

The provisions in PODNS do not have the rank of a constitutional norm and
their violation also cannot justify the unconstitutionality of
of the law. In this sense is the permanent practice of the Constitutional Court. IN
Judgment Me 3 of the Constitutional Court of 1992 in constitutional case Co
30 for 1991 states:

“Failure to comply with the rules of procedure of the> Rules of Procedure
the organization and activity of the National Assembly is not a violation of
constitutional norms. "The Constitutional Court does not discuss such
violations ”.

The opinion of the Constitutional Court is similar in its others
solutions. According to Decision Ke 3 of 1995 on constitutional case Mo 6 for
1995 the fact that Art. 73 of the Constitution explicitly provides
the establishment of PODNS does not attach to the regulations constitutional
nature and its provisions do not become and are not constitutional norms. IN
the same decision the Constitutional Court stated that it did not find grounds
to abandon his understanding expressed in constitutional case Mo 17 of
1991, and after the provisions of PODNS do not represent
constitutional "norms", then their violation does not lead to

unconstitutionality. For these reasons, the Constitutional Court is
held that the alleged violations of the PODNS in the request were irrelevant to
resolving the case and did not discuss in its decision whether these rules were
were violated. The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court and in
Decision Ke 7 of 1998 on constitutional case Me 5 for 1998 and in Decision
Ke 1 of 1999 in constitutional case Me 34 for 1998.

If, nevertheless, the Constitutional Court considers that it should
discusses the allegations of the MPs for admitted
violations of LNA and PODNS, we believe that they are unfounded. Article 11, para.
1 of the LNA stipulates that repeal of a law and its replacement with a new one is allowed
only when the changes are numerous and substantial. The purpose of is clear
the legal text and the introduction of the two cumulative requirements - to
limit the cases of repeal of an existing law and its replacement with a new one,
except when it is necessary to emphasize the essential difference between
both systems. It is not clear from the request why the MPs
consider that the changes are not only numerous but also significant as
they indicate only quantitative arguments for the number of paragraphs and pages,
on which the Law on Personal Income Tax is located. Indeed, the law contains
numerous changes, but it does not rearrange in a new, fundamentally different way
way matter. It creates a more detailed arrangement in line with the reasons
of Decision Mo 10 of the Constitutional Court of 1997 on constitutional
Case No 14 of 1997 concerning the authorities carrying out the inspection under
the law, the place of the Constitutional Court and the president in the system of
state bodies, the obligation of the state to legally guarantee
the dignity and rights of the individual, while ensuring the right
of public information. The VAT Act does not change the purpose or
the subject of the law, which is amended and supplemented, which means that there is not
grounds for adoption of a new law.

The allegations of violations of Art. 68 and
Art. 69, para. 2 of PODNS. The law, whether it amends or supplements
another law or creates a primary regulation of public relations is one thing

as a whole, bound by a common goal and principles. The adoption of the law in two
voting gives the opportunity to cover all the relationships that
should be settled by it. That is why the Constitution does not restrict
the legislator 's ability to supplement or amend the drafts of the
laws between the two votes. In accordance with it, Art. 68, para. 1 of
PODNS explicitly allows not only amendments but also additions to the adopted of
first vote bill, and Art. 69, para. 3 of PODNS puts
restrictions only on the discussion and voting of proposals which
contradict the principles of the bill passed at first vote,
but not for proposals that complement the bill without
contradict its principles. The request does not indicate which of
the principles in the bill passed at the first vote contradict
the texts supplemented and amended in the second ballot, which would be
necessary to substantiate the allegations of the MPs
for contradiction with art. 69, para. 2 of PODNS.

According to the group of MPs between the first and second
voting in the committee of the National Assembly was introduced practically new
a bill that was "apocryphal" and "mysterious" because they were not in it
neither names nor signatures were noted. That meant the law
was adopted by a single vote and was not submitted by MPs
or by the Council of Ministers, i.e. in violation of Art. 87, para. 1 art. 88, para. 1
of the Constitution.

The draft of the Law on Public Procurement Act was submitted by MPs to
compliance with Art. 87, para. 1 was adopted by two votes in accordance with
Art. 88, para. 1 of the Constitution. This is not denied by the group of people
representatives, as in the request they indicate the incoming number of
bill and describe the actions taken between the two votes in
National Assembly. Therefore, the constitutional requirements of Art.
87, para. Tichl. 88, para. 1 are observed. The request does not indicate why the people
Representatives believe that the bill passed in the second vote is

"Fundamentally different from the one adopted at the first vote", as principled

a difference between two bills cannot be justified solely by
the volume of the bill, with the number of paragraphs in it and with the number of
the pages on which it is located. The content requirements of
the bills and the assumptions of the MPs, to
the deadlines for submission and the manner of their certification, which are
established in PODNS, in acts of the Speaker of the National Assembly
or in the practical work of parliament and its committees, cannot
justify a violation of Art. 87, para. 1 art. 88, para. 1 of the Constitution.

In this sense is the Decision Me 1 of the Constitutional Court of 1999.
in Constitutional Case 34 for 1998, which states:

"The law ... was passed in two separate votes
meetings, which is in full compliance with the requirements of Art. 88, para. 1.
Assoc. first of the Constitution. "Possible violation of procedural
rules not provided for in the Constitution, but in the PODNS, do not lead to its
violation. The fact that PODNS itself is subject to control for
constitutionality, shows that its non-observance cannot be
equated with a violation of the Constitution. ”

2. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act with Art. 8,
Art. 117 et seq., Art. 153 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, Art. 4 in its wording after
the amendment with 8 6 of the Amendments to the VAT Act and Art. 4a, established by 8 7 of the Amendments to the VAT Act,
which provides for the establishment of a commission of 7 members, 5 of whom are elected
from the National Assembly, and 2 - from the Council of Ministers, were
unconstitutional, as the majority in the National Assembly
would appoint 5 members, and the Council of Ministers, which was elected by
this majority would appoint the other two members. That meant that
this commission will not be an impartial body, but it will be
political body.

The request does not indicate which constitutional text or principle
the disputed texts contradict. Nevertheless, we do not find

contradiction between these texts and the Constitution as they are

compliant on the one hand with the constitutional principle of division of
the authorities, on the other hand, take into account the interests of all political forces,
represented in parliament. According to Art. 4a, para. 1, item 1 of the Access Act
to the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence
management of the General Staff members of the commission from the quota of
The National Assembly is elected on the proposal of various
parliamentary groups. Therefore, the representatives of the parliamentary
opposition will have the same rights and the same access to information as well
representatives of the parliamentary majority and the government. From
on the other hand, the decision to disclose the information is
assigned to a committee set up in such a way as to exclude the participation of
the legislature and the Council of Ministers. The method of compiling
the commission, as well as the overall regulation in the law, create enough
guarantees for the realization of the purposes of the law under the conditions of
equality and objectivity.

The request also claims that 8 7 in its part, which creates Art.
4d, contradicts Art. 8, Art. 117 et seq. And Art. 153 of the Constitution.
The commission under art. 4d, whose members are appointed by the President,
the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Attorney General would
be a "covert" political body carrying out political orders ",
because the president was the representative of the majority and the president
of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General were appointed by him.

We will not comment on the allegations in the request for so-called “explainable
bias ”of the President, the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
the Attorney General, as we believe that such qualifications are
inadmissible, especially within the framework of the Constitution
procedure for challenging the constitutionality of a law.

According to Art. 92, para. Tichl. 93, para. 1 of the Constitution the President
embodies the unity of the nation and is elected directly by the electorate.
The President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General

appointed by the President on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council at

the conditions of art. 129, para. 2 of the Constitution. The conditions for her election
the release of these bodies ensures their independence and
exclude the possibility of political pressure on them
or influence. It is the way of forming this commission that will
makes the final decision to disclose the information, creates
guarantee its objectivity and impartiality and exclude
the possibility of it being a political body.

The allegations that 8 7 in the part with which it is
creates art. 4d, contradicts the constitutional principle of division of
authorities, of Art. 117 et seq. And of Art. 153 of the Constitution, as he assigned
of the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General
powers they did not have, which in turn meant an amendment and
addition to the Constitution in contradiction with Art. 153. There is no violation
of Art. 8 of the Constitution and the principle of separation of powers, as
as the law does not seize or shift constitutional functions between
individual authorities.

The Constitutional Court has had occasion to rule in connection with
the separation of powers and the interaction between them. In Decision Mo 6
of the Constitutional Court of 1993 in constitutional case Ho 4 of 1993,
is called:

"The legal and political content of the term" division of
authorities ”consists in the fact that the state power has three main spheres of
manifestation assigned to three main systems of organs that are
relatively independent of each other and function in a certain
mutual connection. We are talking about the three main functions of the state
power, i.e. distinguishing competence between the three groups of bodies, not
some kind of triumph excluded from the rule of the modern state.
.... The scientific explanation requires that account be taken of the fact that there is none
The "Great Wall of China" between the various authorities, that they interact with each other
and that in the end they are manifestations of the unified state power and

sovereignty. This is the idea embedded in Art. 8 of the Constitution ...

Moreover, the commission under Art. 4d is not a court panel and it does not
powers of a judicial authority. This is clear from its powers,
specified in the law. The statement in the request that the authorities of
the judiciary appoints from its system other bodies of
the executive branch - the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
the Attorney General does not appoint the commission as a collegial body of
executive power, and nominate individual members. Permanently
established practice in the operation of the 1991 Constitution is
the appointment of magistrates in the central election commissions for
holding parliamentary and presidential elections, as well as
the appointment in these cases is made by non-judicial bodies
power such as the President and the National Assembly. The perception of
the claim of MPs that the participation of magistrates in
bodies outside the judiciary are unconstitutional
meant that the elections in which magistrates participated in
election commissions were produced in violation of the Constitution.
On the contrary, the participation of magistrates in the commission and a representative of
the President, as well as the conditions for the appointment and dismissal of
the members of the commission shall establish guarantees of its impartiality,
objectivity and independence.

The Constitution does not exhaustively regulate the powers of the chief
prosecutor and the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation. Article 133 of
The Constitution refers to a law on organization and structure
of the judiciary, which also regulates the powers of
the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General. If
accept that the conferral of powers by law on the President of
The Supreme Court of Cassation and the "Chief Prosecutor" is
unconstitutional, this would mean that the texts in the Act on
the judiciary and in procedural laws in their part concerning
the powers of these bodies are unconstitutional because

supplement and amend the Constitution.

The request also disputes 8 7 in the part with which Art. 4d,
arguing that the text which provides for the establishment of working groups by
executive authorities has been unconstitutional since
the ministers and the other heads of the bodies under art. 4d bili
representatives of the ruling political formation and those appointed by
their primary commissions would carry out party orders.

We believe that the law contains sufficient guarantees of objectivity
and the impartiality of the law enforcement authorities. Does not respond
to the truth the statement that the working groups would make subjective
judgment. The working groups do only preparatory work, but they do not
decide to disclose the information. Moreover, the law does not
allows subjective judgment, as it exhaustively states
what documents should be available to make one or the other
conclusion regarding the activity of the person - art. 5, para. 2 in its wording after
the amendment with 8 8 of the Amendments to the VAT Act. Decisions are made by
the commission under art. 4d, the method of compiling which guarantees
its objectivity and impartiality, and every citizen has the right to
judicial protection against wrongful acts committed in violation of
of the law - art. bg, created with 8 11 of the AIS ZDDBDS.

3. Regarding the allegations for contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act with Art.
4, para. 2, Art. 32, para. 2, Art. 38 and Art. 56 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, the law contradicts
the constitutional texts mentioned and the principles in the preamble of
The Constitution that the basic law protects the citizen from discrediting, from
damage to his good name, honor and dignity.

The issue of the compliance of the VAT Act with the constitutional one
the guaranteed right of citizens to information and constitutionally
the established obligation of the state to defend citizens from
discrediting and damaging their good name, honor and dignity, is
clarified in detail in the reasons of Decision Me 10 of the Constitutional Court of

1997 in constitutional case Mo 14 for 1997. In the case it was also

a request was made to declare the unconstitutionality entirely on
VATA, which was rejected by the Constitutional Court. In the reasons of
the decision states that the right of society to receive
information “that> is of interest to him is essential
constitutional right enshrined in Art. 41, para. 1 of the Constitution. When
legislation on the right to information, as is the case with
VATA, the state is obliged to comply with the restrictions specified in
this constitutional text and to provide legal guarantees for the protection of
listed in Art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution constitutional values ​​and
fundamental rights - the rights and reputation of citizens, the national
security, public order, public health and morality.

We believe that the AIS of the VAT Act is fully compliant with the motives in
the said decision of the Constitutional Court. The law regulates in detail
the conditions and the order for disclosure of information and the right to judicial
protection of citizens and does not link the disclosed information to any
either negative consequences or restriction of the rights of individuals,
whose names are disclosed in the prescribed order. The statement in
the demand that the law create conditions for the persecution of citizens
due to their beliefs in contradiction with Art. 38 of the Constitution. One
of the merits of the law is that it does not contain an evaluative moment and does not
imposes on> legislative order a certain moral conclusion, such as
at the same time, it provides for the disclosure of sufficient data to enable it to do so
every citizen to judge from the point of view of his own morality and
views in each case whether the activity was
worthy of respect or has been reprehensible. Therefore it cannot be
argues that the law infringes on the dignity and rights of the individual and
violates Art. 4, para. 2 and Art. 38 of the Constitution. On the contrary, he only
provides an opportunity for citizens to receive the same form and
content information. The dignity and good name of the citizens
could only be harmed if they were dealing with

anti-social and reprehensible activity, which is why they do not want to

society to know about it. We believe that in this case not the law, but
their conscious activity has damaged their dignity and reputation,
and that in comparing their interest with the law of society
of information should undoubtedly be given priority to the right of
information society.

The allegations of contradiction with Art. 32, para. 2 of the Constitution are
incompatible with the law - on the one hand this constitutional text
allows exceptions provided by law, and on the other hand, the Law on Personal Income Tax does not
provides for tracking, photographing, filming, recording of persons,
whose names will be disclosed under the conditions and in the manner provided therein.

The request alleges that the notion of "beneficiaries"
used in 6 7, 8 8, 8 21 and others. it was so "stretchy" that it gave
opportunity for subjective judgment and for discrediting the persons
judgment. We do not share this statement with MPs, no
only in so far as it concerns the defamation for the reasons already mentioned,
and his share of subjective judgment. In Art. 5, para. 3 of the Access Act
to the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence
management of the General Staff in its wording after the amendment by 8 8 of
ZID ZDDBDS exhaustively lists the documents that must be
available to establish the quality of a beneficiary who
leaves no room for subjectivism. And these people, like everyone else
others, have judicial protection under Art. bg, created with 8 11 of the AIS
Зддвдс.

According to the group of MPs, Art. Z, para. 1, 6. “e” of the Law
for access to the documents of the former State Security and the former
Intelligence Department of the General Staff in its wording after
the amendment with 6 5 of the AIS ZDDBDS was in contradiction with art. 31, para. 3 of
The constitution, according to which the accused is presumed innocent until
establishing the contrary with an effective sentence. This statement
also cannot be supported. The VAT Act does not provide as a consequence

the persons under art. 3, para. 1, 6. “is” to be found guilty or convicted of

the crime for which they have been charged in advance
production regardless of the cessation of production. On the contrary,
these persons are and remain unconvicted for this act and nothing changes in
their judicial past. The AIS of the VAT Act considers this circumstance
only as one of the conditions for disclosure,
provided by law, for these persons, but not with any others
consequences, including the consequences that the laws link to
condemnation.

The statement that in the law (8 3, with which it was amended) is also unfounded
Art. 2, 6 5, which amended Art. 3, para. 1, items 1, 8 8, which amended Art. 5,
al. 1, item 1) arbitrary interpretations of the written evidence were given and
a person appearing in any documents would be discredited
despite the fact that there is no evidence of cooperation. The law
exhaustively and in detail lists the documents on the basis of which
accepts as established whether the person has been a full-time, part-time employee
associate or beneficiary (art. 5, para. 2 et seq. in their wording
after the amendment by 8 8 of the AIS ZDDBDS) and these documents completely
comply with the legal definitions in 8 1 of the Additional
provisions in its wording after the amendment by 8 21 of the Amendments to the VAT Act.
Moreover, the legislator has created an explicit protection of persons under
in respect of which sufficient data are lacking to establish
their cooperation and this is clearly evident from the procedure regulated in Art. 5, para.
Zi sl., And from the explicit text of Art. 5, para. 4, as well as the ban on
publication in the report under Art. 3, para. 1, item 3 of the names of the persons under Art. 3,
al. 4 in their editions after the entry into force of the VAT Act.

According to the group of MPs, the affected citizens were
deprived of their right to defense, including judicial, contrary to
Art. 56 of the Constitution. This statement is not only unfounded, but also
incorrect - p8 11 of the AIS ZDDBDS is created art. 6 g, according to which persons
whose names are included in the report under Art. 3, para. 1, item 3 in contradiction with p

this law, may file against the commission under art. 4, para. 1 claim for

compensation under the State Liability for Damages Act,
caused to citizens.

4. Regarding the allegations for contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act with Art. 6
of the Constitution

The request alleges that the AIS ZDDBDS contradicts Art. 6 from
The constitution because it created "discrimination," de facto lustration
in relation to the constitutionally guaranteed rights of citizens to be
elected or appointed to certain positions in the state ”. Like
a concrete example of this contradiction is cited 8 23 of the law.

Article 6 of the Constitution prohibits the establishment of restrictions
of rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs,
political affiliation, personal and social status or
property status. It is not clear from the request which is exhaustive
the grounds listed in the constitutional text by the Members of Parliament
matured in the AIS ZDDBDS and specifically in 8 23 of the law. 8 23 settles hypotheses
of incompatibility between positions and activities and does not restrict rights
of citizens. Everyone can choose whether to borrow one or the other
public office, whether to carry out a public activity or not
cooperates with the security services. The perception of the statement of
MPs that this restricts the rights of citizens in
contrary to the Constitution, would mean that all laws that
establish incompatibility in the holding of certain positions,
such as Art. 132 of the Judiciary Act, Art. 7 of the Law on
the civil servant, art. 41 of the Local Self-Government Act and
local administration, etc., are unconstitutional.

5. Regarding the allegation of contradiction with the preamble, Art. 1 and
Art. 9 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, the disclosure of the "files"

thus directly affecting the national security of the State, a

the philosophy, spirit, and texts of the law were directly directed against
national security and statehood.

The law creates sufficient guarantees for the protection of
national security and this is clear from the texts included in it -
Art. 3, para. 2, items 1 and 2 of Art. 3, para. 4 in the wording after their amendment by 8 5 of
ZID ZDDBDS, art. 4d, para. 3, t. Tial. Article 4 4g after their creation c8 7
from ZID ZDDBDS. The mechanisms and procedures provided by law
ensure the protection of the information necessary for the national
security, while enabling society to
exercise its constitutionally proclaimed right to information.

The law does not deny continuity in specialized services and
this is also clear from Art. 3, para. 2, item 1 in the wording after its amendment by 8
B of the AIS ZDDBDS.

The argument in the request that it was possible to file many cases
v. the Republic of Bulgaria in the International Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg, is unconvincing and irrelevant to the request - if the people
representatives believe that the law does not comply with generally accepted norms
of international law and of international treaties under which
The Republic of Bulgaria is a party, they should also make a request under Art.
149, para. 1, item 4 of the Constitution for declaring inconsistency with the law
with such norms or contracts.

In conclusion, and in view of the above, we consider that the request of
the group of MPs to establish
the unconstitutionality entirely of the Law for amendment and supplement
of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security (SG,
no. 24 of 2001) or alternatively to certain provisions of the law,

stated in the request is unfounded and should be rejected.


OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
he

constitutional case Mo 7 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of March 29, 2001, we were constituted as
interested party in the constitutional case Me 7 for 2001, initiated
at the request of 54 MPs from the 38th National Assembly for
establishing entirely the> unconstitutionality of the Law on
amendment of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former
State Security (AIS ZDDBDS), promulgated in the State Gazette, issue
24 of 2001, or alternatively> to establish
the unconstitutionality of 8 6, 8 7 his part, with which art.
Agichl. 4e, 83, 85, 88, 821, 823 and 25 of the law.

1. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of the Amendments and Supplements to the VAT Act with Article
4, para. 1, art. 87, para. Tichl. 88, para. 1 of the Constitution

The request alleges that the AIS ZDDBDS contradicts Art. 4, para. That
The Constitution, as its adoption violated Art. 11, para. 1 of
The Law on Normative Acts (LNA) and Art. 68 Art. 69, para. 2 of the Regulations
for the organization and activity of the National Assembly (PODNS).

The violation of Art. 11, para. 1 of the LNA is justified by the fact that
The Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security
(ZDDBDS), which is amended and supplemented, had 14 members located on 3
pages, while the draft of the National Assembly, originally submitted to the National Assembly
ZID ZDDBDS had 22 paragraphs, located on 7 pages, and the adopted one
was three times larger in volume than originally imported and was
located on 17 pages.

The violation of PODNS is justified by the fact that between the first and
second reading and after the deadlines for proposals was tabled
practically a new bill, which in principle differed from the adopted one
at the first vote and was “made by someone unknown and imported by someone unknown
whom ”. The fact that the bill was new was evident from its new title.

The Council of Ministers is not the submitter of the draft of the Law on Public Procurement Act,
therefore we do not have accurate information about the content
of the bill originally submitted to the National Assembly and
the amendments made between the first and second votes in
him. However, we believe that the above arguments of the group of people
representatives can not substantiate the conclusion of unconstitutionality of
of the law.

Possible violations in the legislative process could
lead to unconstitutionality of the law only if they are violations
of constitutional norms establishing requirements for the manner of
adoption of laws. When the law is passed in compliance with
the requirements of art. 87 Art. 88 of the Constitution, it cannot be argued that
violation or non - compliance with other procedural rules under
the adoption of the normative acts, established in LNA and PODNS, leads to
unconstitutional, as it was a violation of the principle of
the rule of law established in Art. 4, para. 1. The purpose of the LNA is to create
rules for the drafting of regulations relevant to
the application and interpretation of the acts. Article 11, para. 1 of the LNA is legal, and

non-constitutional norm and non-compliance with this text in the adoption of

a law cannot be a ground for unconstitutionality of the law.
Perceiving the opposite would mean that any special law would
was unconstitutional as adopted in violation of the constitutional
principle of the rule of law, as it establishes deviations
of the general order established by an effective law.

A conclusion in a similar sense follows from the reasons in Decision Me 5 of
1998 on constitutional case Co 2 for 1998, in which the Constitutional
the court held that:

“The assessment of constitutionality ... according to Art. 149, para. 1,
item 2 of the Constitution can be given only in view of this,
whether constitutional provisions and not other normative ones have been violated
acts introducing additional requirements and procedures (Decision Mo 3
since 1991 under k. e. Me 17 of 1991)

The provisions in PODNS do not have the rank of a constitutional norm and
their violation also cannot justify the unconstitutionality of
of the law. In this sense is the permanent practice of the Constitutional Court. IN
Judgment Me 3 of the Constitutional Court of 1992 in constitutional case Co
30 for 1991 states:

“Failure to comply with the rules of procedure of the> Rules of Procedure
the organization and activity of the National Assembly is not a violation of
constitutional norms. "The Constitutional Court does not discuss such
violations ”.

The opinion of the Constitutional Court is similar in its others
solutions. According to Decision Ke 3 of 1995 on constitutional case Mo 6 for
1995 the fact that Art. 73 of the Constitution explicitly provides
the establishment of PODNS does not attach to the regulations constitutional
nature and its provisions do not become and are not constitutional norms. IN
the same decision the Constitutional Court stated that it did not find grounds
to abandon his understanding expressed in constitutional case Mo 17 of
1991, and after the provisions of PODNS do not represent
constitutional "norms", then their violation does not lead to

unconstitutionality. For these reasons, the Constitutional Court is
held that the alleged violations of the PODNS in the request were irrelevant to
resolving the case and did not discuss in its decision whether these rules were
were violated. The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court and in
Decision Ke 7 of 1998 on constitutional case Me 5 for 1998 and in Decision
Ke 1 of 1999 in constitutional case Me 34 for 1998.

If, nevertheless, the Constitutional Court considers that it should
discusses the allegations of the MPs for admitted
violations of LNA and PODNS, we believe that they are unfounded. Article 11, para.
1 of the LNA stipulates that repeal of a law and its replacement with a new one is allowed
only when the changes are numerous and substantial. The purpose of is clear
the legal text and the introduction of the two cumulative requirements - to
limit the cases of repeal of an existing law and its replacement with a new one,
except when it is necessary to emphasize the essential difference between
both systems. It is not clear from the request why the MPs
consider that the changes are not only numerous but also significant as
they indicate only quantitative arguments for the number of paragraphs and pages,
on which the Law on Personal Income Tax is located. Indeed, the law contains
numerous changes, but it does not rearrange in a new, fundamentally different way
way matter. It creates a more detailed arrangement in line with the reasons
of Decision Mo 10 of the Constitutional Court of 1997 on constitutional
Case No 14 of 1997 concerning the authorities carrying out the inspection under
the law, the place of the Constitutional Court and the president in the system of
state bodies, the obligation of the state to legally guarantee
the dignity and rights of the individual, while ensuring the right
of public information. The VAT Act does not change the purpose or
the subject of the law, which is amended and supplemented, which means that there is not
grounds for adoption of a new law.

The allegations of violations of Art. 68 and
Art. 69, para. 2 of PODNS. The law, whether it amends or supplements
another law or creates a primary regulation of public relations is one thing

as a whole, bound by a common goal and principles. The adoption of the law in two
voting gives the opportunity to cover all the relationships that
should be settled by it. That is why the Constitution does not restrict
the legislator 's ability to supplement or amend the drafts of the
laws between the two votes. In accordance with it, Art. 68, para. 1 of
PODNS explicitly allows not only amendments but also additions to the adopted of
first vote bill, and Art. 69, para. 3 of PODNS puts
restrictions only on the discussion and voting of proposals which
contradict the principles of the bill passed at first vote,
but not for proposals that complement the bill without
contradict its principles. The request does not indicate which of
the principles in the bill passed at the first vote contradict
the texts supplemented and amended in the second ballot, which would be
necessary to substantiate the allegations of the MPs
for contradiction with art. 69, para. 2 of PODNS.

According to the group of MPs between the first and second
voting in the committee of the National Assembly was introduced practically new
a bill that was "apocryphal" and "mysterious" because they were not in it
neither names nor signatures were noted. That meant the law
was adopted by a single vote and was not submitted by MPs
or by the Council of Ministers, i.e. in violation of Art. 87, para. 1 art. 88, para. 1
of the Constitution.

The draft of the Law on Public Procurement Act was submitted by MPs to
compliance with Art. 87, para. 1 was adopted by two votes in accordance with
Art. 88, para. 1 of the Constitution. This is not denied by the group of people
representatives, as in the request they indicate the incoming number of
bill and describe the actions taken between the two votes in
National Assembly. Therefore, the constitutional requirements of Art.
87, para. Tichl. 88, para. 1 are observed. The request does not indicate why the people
Representatives believe that the bill passed in the second vote is

"Fundamentally different from the one adopted at the first vote", as principled

a difference between two bills cannot be justified solely by
the volume of the bill, with the number of paragraphs in it and with the number of
the pages on which it is located. The content requirements of
the bills and the assumptions of the MPs, to
the deadlines for submission and the manner of their certification, which are
established in PODNS, in acts of the Speaker of the National Assembly
or in the practical work of parliament and its committees, cannot
justify a violation of Art. 87, para. 1 art. 88, para. 1 of the Constitution.

In this sense is the Decision Me 1 of the Constitutional Court of 1999.
in Constitutional Case 34 for 1998, which states:

"The law ... was passed in two separate votes
meetings, which is in full compliance with the requirements of Art. 88, para. 1.
Assoc. first of the Constitution. "Possible violation of procedural
rules not provided for in the Constitution, but in the PODNS, do not lead to its
violation. The fact that PODNS itself is subject to control for
constitutionality, shows that its non-observance cannot be
equated with a violation of the Constitution. ”

2. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act with Art. 8,
Art. 117 et seq., Art. 153 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, Art. 4 in its wording after
the amendment with 8 6 of the AISA 4a, established by 8 7 of the Amendments to the VAT Act,
which provides for the establishment of a commission of 7 members, 5 of whom are elected
from the National Assembly, and 2 - from the Council of Ministers, were
unconstitutional, as the majority in the National Assembly
would appoint 5 members, and the Council of Ministers, which was elected by
this majority would appoint the other two members. That meant that
this commission will not be an impartial body, but it will be
political body.

The request does not indicate which constitutional text or principle
the disputed texts contradict. Nevertheless, we do not find

contradiction between these texts and the Constitution as they are

compliant on the one hand with the constitutional principle of division of
the authorities, on the other hand, take into account the interests of all political forces,
represented in parliament. According to Art. 4a, para. 1, item 1 of the Access Act
to the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence
management of the General Staff members of the commission from the quota of
The National Assembly is elected on the proposal of various
parliamentary groups. Therefore, the representatives of the parliamentary
opposition will have the same rights and the same access to information as well
representatives of the parliamentary majority and the government. From
on the other hand, the decision to disclose the information is
assigned to a committee set up in such a way as to exclude the participation of
the legislature and the Council of Ministers. The method of compiling
the commission, as well as the overall regulation in the law, create enough
guarantees for the realization of the purposes of the law under the conditions of
equality and objectivity.

The request also claims that 8 7 in its part, which creates Art.
4d, contradicts Art. 8, Art. 117 et seq. And Art. 153 of the Constitution.
The commission under art. 4d, whose members are appointed by the President,
the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Attorney General would
be a "covert" political body carrying out political orders ",
because the president was the representative of the majority and the president
of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General were appointed by him.

We will not comment on the allegations in the request for so-called “explainable
bias ”of the President, the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
the Attorney General, as we believe that such qualifications are
inadmissible, especially within the framework of the Constitution
procedure for challenging the constitutionality of a law.

According to Art. 92, para. Tichl. 93, para. 1 of the Constitution the President
embodies the unity of the nation and is elected directly by the electorate.
The President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General

appointed by the President on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council at

the conditions of art. 129, para. 2 of the Constitution. The conditions for her election
the release of these bodies ensures their independence and
exclude the possibility of political pressure on them
or influence. It is the way of forming this commission that will
makes the final decision to disclose the information, creates
guarantee its objectivity and impartiality and exclude
the possibility of it being a political body.

The allegations that 8 7 in the part with which it is
creates art. 4d, contradicts the constitutional principle of division of
authorities, of Art. 117 et seq. And of Art. 153 of the Constitution, as he assigned
of the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General
powers they did not have, which in turn meant an amendment and
addition to the Constitution in contradiction with Art. 153. There is no violation
of Art. 8 of the Constitution and the principle of separation of powers, as
as the law does not seize or shift constitutional functions between
individual authorities.

The Constitutional Court has had occasion to rule in connection with
the separation of powers and the interaction between them. In Decision Mo 6
of the Constitutional Court of 1993 in constitutional case Ho 4 of 1993,
is called:

"The legal and political content of the term" division of
authorities ”consists in the fact that the state power has three main spheres of
manifestation assigned to three main systems of organs that are
relatively independent of each other and function in a certain
mutual connection. We are talking about the three main functions of the state
power, i.e. distinguishing competence between the three groups of bodies, not
some kind of triumph excluded from the rule of the modern state.
.... The scientific explanation requires that account be taken of the fact that there is none
The "Great Wall of China" between the various authorities, that they interact with each other
and that in the end they are manifestations of the unified state power and

sovereignty. This is the idea embedded in Art. 8 of the Constitution ...

Moreover, the commission under Art. 4d is not a court panel and it does not
powers of a judicial authority. This is clear from its powers,
specified in the law. The statement in the request that the authorities of
the judiciary appoints from its system other bodies of
the executive branch - the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
the Attorney General does not appoint the commission as a collegial body of
executive power, and nominate individual members. Permanently
established practice in the operation of the 1991 Constitution is
the appointment of magistrates in the central election commissions for
holding parliamentary and presidential elections, as well as
the appointment in these cases is made by non-judicial bodies
power such as the President and the National Assembly. The perception of
the claim of MPs that the participation of magistrates in
bodies outside the judiciary are unconstitutional
meant that the elections in which magistrates participated in
election commissions were produced in violation of the Constitution.
On the contrary, the participation of magistrates in the commission and a representative of
the President, as well as the conditions for the appointment and dismissal of
the members of the commission shall establish guarantees of its impartiality,
objectivity and independence.

The Constitution does not exhaustively regulate the powers of the chief
prosecutor and the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation. Article 133 of
The Constitution refers to a law on organization and structure
of the judiciary, which also regulates the powers of
the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General. If
accept that the conferral of powers by law on the President of
The Supreme Court of Cassation and the "Chief Prosecutor" is
unconstitutional, this would mean that the texts in the Act on
the judiciary and in procedural laws in their part concerning
the powers of these bodies are unconstitutional because

supplement and amend the Constitution.

The request also disputes 8 7 in the part with which Art. 4d,
arguing that the text which provides for the establishment of working groups by
executive authorities has been unconstitutional since
the ministers and the other heads of the bodies under art. 4d bili
representatives of the ruling political formation and those appointed by
their primary commissions would carry out party orders.

We believe that the law contains sufficient guarantees of objectivity
and the impartiality of the law enforcement authorities. Does not respond
to the truth the statement that the working groups would make subjective
judgment. The working groups do only preparatory work, but they do not
decide to disclose the information. Moreover, the law does not
allows subjective judgment, as it exhaustively states
what documents should be available to make one or the other
conclusion regarding the activity of the person - art. 5, para. 2 in its wording after
the amendment with 8 8 of the Amendments to the VAT Act. Decisions are made by
the commission under art. 4d, the method of compiling which guarantees
its objectivity and impartiality, and every citizen has the right to
judicial protection against wrongful acts committed in violation of
of the law - art. bg, created with 8 11 of the AIS ZDDBDS.

3. Regarding the allegations for contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act with Art.
4, para. 2, Art. 32, para. 2, Art. 38 and Art. 56 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, the law contradicts
the constitutional texts mentioned and the principles in the preamble of
The Constitution that the basic law protects the citizen from discrediting, from
damage to his good name, honor and dignity.

The issue of the compliance of the VAT Act with the constitutional one
the guaranteed right of citizens to information and constitutionally
the established obligation of the state to defend citizens from
discrediting and damaging their good name, honor and dignity, is
clarified in detail in the reasons of Decision Me 10 of the Constitutional Court of

1997 in constitutional case Mo 14 for 1997. In the case it was also

a request was made to declare the unconstitutionality entirely on
VATA, which was rejected by the Constitutional Court. In the reasons of
the decision states that the right of society to receive
information “that> is of interest to him is essential
constitutional right enshrined in Art. 41, para. 1 of the Constitution. When
legislation on the right to information, as is the case with
VATA, the state is obliged to comply with the restrictions specified in
this constitutional text and to provide legal guarantees for the protection of
listed in Art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution constitutional values ​​and
fundamental rights - the rights and reputation of citizens, the national
security, public order, public health and morality.

We believe that the AIS of the VAT Act is fully compliant with the motives in
the said decision of the Constitutional Court. The law regulates in detail
the conditions and the order for disclosure of information and the right to judicial
protection of citizens and does not link the disclosed information to any
either negative consequences or restriction of the rights of individuals,
whose names are disclosed in the prescribed order. The statement in
the demand that the law create conditions for the persecution of citizens
due to their beliefs in contradiction with Art. 38 of the Constitution. One
of the merits of the law is that it does not contain an evaluative moment and does not
imposes on> legislative order a certain moral conclusion, such as
at the same time, it provides for the disclosure of sufficient data to enable it to do so
every citizen to judge from the point of view of his own morality and
views in each case whether the activity was
worthy of respect or has been reprehensible. Therefore it cannot be
argues that the law infringes on the dignity and rights of the individual and
violates Art. 4, para. 2 and Art. 38 of the Constitution. On the contrary, he only
provides an opportunity for citizens to receive the same form and
content information. The dignity and good name of the citizens
could only be harmed if they were dealing with

anti-social and reprehensible activity, which is why they do not want to

society to know about it. We believe that in this case not the law, but
their conscious activity has damaged their dignity and reputation,
and that in comparing their interest with the law of society
of information should undoubtedly be given priority to the right of
information society.

The allegations of contradiction with Art. 32, para. 2 of the Constitution are
incompatible with the law - on the one hand this constitutional text
allows exceptions provided by law, and on the other hand, the Law on Personal Income Tax does not
provides for tracking, photographing, filming, recording of persons,
whose names will be disclosed under the conditions and in the manner provided therein.

The request alleges that the notion of "beneficiaries"
used in 6 7, 8 8, 8 21 and others. it was so "stretchy" that it gave
opportunity for subjective judgment and for discrediting the persons
judgment. We do not share this statement with MPs, no
only in so far as it concerns the defamation for the reasons already mentioned,
and his share of subjective judgment. In Art. 5, para. 3 of the Access Act
to the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence
management of the General Staff in its wording after the amendment by 8 8 of
ZID ZDDBDS exhaustively lists the documents that must be
available to establish the quality of a beneficiary who
leaves no room for subjectivism. And these people, like everyone else
others, have judicial protection under Art. bg, created with 8 11 of the AIS
Зддвдс.

According to the group of MPs, Art. Z, para. 1, 6. “e” of the Law
for access to the documents of the former State Security and the former
Intelligence Department of the General Staff in its wording after
the amendment with 6 5 of the AIS ZDDBDS was in contradiction with art. 31, para. 3 of
The constitution, according to which the accused is presumed innocent until
establishing the contrary with an effective sentence. This statement
also cannot be supported. The VAT Act does not provide as a consequence

the persons under art. 3, para. 1, 6. “is” to be found guilty or convicted of

the crime for which they have been charged in advance
production regardless of the cessation of production. On the contrary,
these persons are and remain unconvicted for this act and nothing changes in
their judicial past. The AIS of the VAT Act considers this circumstance
only as one of the conditions for disclosure,
provided by law, for these persons, but not with any others
consequences, including the consequences that the laws link to
condemnation.

The statement that in the law (8 3, with which it was amended) is also unfounded
Art. 2, 6 5, which amended Art. 3, para. 1, items 1, 8 8, which amended Art. 5,
al. 1, item 1) arbitrary interpretations of the written evidence were given and
a person appearing in any documents would be discredited
despite the fact that there is no evidence of cooperation. The law
exhaustively and in detail lists the documents on the basis of which
accepts as established whether the person was a full-time associate, a part-time employee
associate or beneficiary (art. 5, para. 2 et seq. in their wording
after the amendment by 8 8 of the Amendments to the VAT Act) and these documents in full
comply with the legal definitions in 8 1 of the Additional
provisions in its wording after the amendment by 8 21 of the Amendments to the VAT Act.
Moreover, the legislator has created an explicit protection of persons under
in respect of which sufficient data are lacking to establish
their cooperation and this is clearly evident from the procedure regulated in Art. 5, para.
Zi sl., And from the explicit text of Art. 5, para. 4, as well as the ban on
publication in the report under Art. 3, para. 1, item 3 of the names of the persons under Art. 3,
al. 4 in their editions after the entry into force of the VAT Act.

According to the group of MPs, the affected citizens were
deprived of their right to defense, including judicial, contrary to
Art. 56 of the Constitution. This statement is not only unfounded, but also
incorrect - p8 11 of the AIS ZDDBDS is created art. 6 g, according to which persons
whose names are included in the report under Art. 3, para. 1, item 3 in contradiction with p

this law, may file against the commission under art. 4, para. 1 claim for

compensation under the State Liability for Damages Act,
caused to citizens.

4. Regarding the allegations for contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act with Art. 6
of the Constitution

The request alleges that the AIS ZDDBDS contradicts Art. 6 from
The constitution because it created "discrimination," de facto lustration
in relation to the constitutionally guaranteed rights of citizens to be
elected or appointed to certain positions in the state ”. Like
a concrete example of this contradiction is cited 8 23 of the law.

Article 6 of the Constitution prohibits the establishment of restrictions
of rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs,
political affiliation, personal and social status or
property status. It is not clear from the request which is exhaustive
the grounds listed in the constitutional text by the Members of Parliament
matured in the AIS ZDDBDS and specifically in 8 23 of the law. 8 23 settles hypotheses
of incompatibility between positions and activities and does not restrict rights
of citizens. Everyone can choose whether to borrow one or the other
public office, whether to carry out a public activity or not
cooperates with the security services. The perception of the statement of
MPs that this restricts the rights of citizens in
contrary to the Constitution, would mean that all laws that
establish incompatibility in the holding of certain positions,
such as Art. 132 of the Judiciary Act, Art. 7 of the Law on
the civil servant, art. 41 of the Local Self-Government Act and
local administration, etc., are unconstitutional.

5. Regarding the allegation of contradiction with the preamble, Art. 1 and
Art. 9 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, the disclosure of the "files"

thus directly affecting the national security of the State, a

the philosophy, spirit, and texts of the law were directly directed against
national security and statehood.

The law creates sufficient guarantees for the protection of
national security and this is clear from the texts included in it -
Art. 3, para. 2, items 1 and 2 of Art. 3, para. 4 in the wording after their amendment by 8 5 of
ZID ZDDBDS, art. 4d, para. 3, t. Tial. Article 4 4g after their creation c8 7
from ZID ZDDBDS. The mechanisms and procedures provided by law
ensure the protection of the information necessary for the national
security, while enabling society to
exercise its constitutionally proclaimed right to information.

The law does not deny continuity in specialized services and
this is also clear from Art. 3, para. 2, item 1 in the wording after its amendment by 8
B of the AIS ZDDBDS.

The argument in the request that it was possible to file many cases
v. the Republic of Bulgaria in the International Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg, is unconvincing and irrelevant to the request - if the people
representatives believe that the law does not comply with generally accepted norms
of international law and of international treaties under which
The Republic of Bulgaria is a party, they should also make a request under Art.
149, para. 1, item 4 of the Constitution for declaring inconsistency with the law
with such norms or contracts.

In conclusion, and in view of the above, we consider that the request of
the group of MPs to establish
the unconstitutionality entirely of the Law for amendment and supplement
of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security (SG,
no. 24 of 2001) or alternatively to certain provisions of the law,

stated in the request is unfounded and should be rejected.
SUBJECT: the request of a group / 54 / MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly to announce in full
the unconstitutionality of the Amendment Act and
addition to the Law on Access to Documents of
the former State Security / prom. SG, no. 24 from
13.03.2001 /, or alternatively to be established
the unconstitutionality of 86, 57, art. 4d, art. 4e, 63,
Art. 2, 65, Art. 3, para 1, items 1, 88, 621, 623 and 625 of the same
law.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The request to declare the unconstitutionality of
The Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents
of the former State Security as a whole or alternatively, to
established the unconstitutionality of 66, 7, art. 4d, art. 4e, 63, art. 2,

85, art. 3, para 1, items 1, 88, 621, 823 and 625 of the same law, was raised by
group / 54 / MPs from XXXUS National Assembly.

With a ruling of March 29, 2001, the Constitutional
the court allowed the request for consideration on the merits and constituted it
National Security Service - Ministry of Interior as one of the stakeholders
parties to the case.

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE REQUEST:

The request of the group of MPs was made
by a fit constitutional subject within the meaning of Art. 150, para. from
The Constitution. Its examination is within the competence of
The Constitutional Court, according to Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution and
Article 17, paragraph | of the Constitutional Court Act.

IN THE ESSENCE OF THE REQUESTS:

I consider that, although admissible, the request is unfounded,
insofar as the Law for amendment adopted by the National Assembly and
supplement to the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State
security does not> contradict the Constitution My legal
Considerations in support of this opinion are the following:

REGARDING THEIR FORMAL MOTIVATIONS:

In general, the invoked ones are reduced to the statement
to the claimants that the National Assembly had violated the principles of
the legislative process, which is in contradiction with Art. 4, para. 1, art. 87, para.
1, art. 88, para. 11 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. The request in
this part of it concerns the procedure for the adoption of the AAS of the VAT Act by
National Assembly. Given the fact that the right of legislative
only MPs and the Council of Ministers have an initiative,
I can only express a general opinion on the above arguments of
seekers.

The group of MPs cannot justify
conclusion that the law is unconstitutional, claiming that it exists
contradiction with the Constitution due to violation and non-observance of
the procedural rules for the adoption of regulations,
established in the Law on the normative acts of the LNA / and the Regulations for
the organization and the activity of the National Assembly LODNS).
Applicants develop the thesis that this indirectly leads to

unconstitutional, as it was a violation of the principle
for a state governed by the rule of law, established in Art. 4, para 1. It is exactly the opposite
the permanent practice of the Constitutional Court, expressed in a number of its
solutions e.g. Decision Xe3 / 1992 on a constitutional case
Xe30 / 1991, decision Xo5 / 1998. on constitutional case Xe2 / 1998 and
etc., which states that: “Failure to comply with procedural rules of
The Rules for the organization and activity of the National Assembly are not
violation of constitutional norms. The Constitutional Court does not
discuss such violations. "

In addition, the claim of the claimants that it was submitted
"Apocryphal" or "mysterious" bill because they were not in it
marked neither names nor there were signatures could not justify
the thesis that the bill adopted in the second vote, "was
fundamentally different from that adopted in the first ballot ”, f
insolvent. Applicants are motivated only by the volume of
the bill, the number of paragraphs in it and the number of pages, on
which was located. In doing so, they are challenging the constitutional ones
powers of MPs in the course of the legislative
process to make changes to the bills in question first
and second reading. In this way the right of the People's is denied
assembly as a legislative body to amend or supplement the submitted
bills in the course of their discussion.

Based on the above considerations, I consider that
there is no contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of Art. 4, para 1, Art. 87, para. and
Article 88, paragraph | of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

ON THEIR ESSENTIAL MOTIVATIONS:

The essential “considerations of” are unfounded
the claimants, according to which the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law
for access to> documents of the former State Security
ZIDZDDADS / is unconstitutional from the point of view of
its substantive part.

I consider that there is no contradiction between the texts of
the law and the Constitution, as they are fully in line with the basic
constitutional right of society to receive information that
is of interest to him. The right of access to information
corresponds to the obligation of the state to regulate the order in laws
and the conditions for exercising this right.

An expression of this obligation and of public necessity
from regulating the right of access to information appear as
The Law on Access to Public Information and the Law on Access to Public Information.

Also a number of international acts on which
The Republic of Bulgaria is a party, creating an obligation to protect the right
access to information. Fundamental international law
documents governing the principles underlying the law
of access to information are the Universal Declaration of the Rights of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
The Convention on the Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of
Europe and Recommendation K (81) 19 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe of 25.11.1981

At its first session in 1946, the General Assembly of
The United Nations unanimously adopts a resolution on freedom of information,
which reads: “The right to information is a fundamental human right and is
a condition for all the freedoms to which the United Nations aspires. "

In this context, the constitutional legislator has settled
the right of everyone to access the information contained therein
the state bodies, having regulated this right in art. 41, para. 2 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. This right is recognized to everyone
it is comprehensive and covers all information contained in y
all bodies except those defined by the Constitution as
restricted information.

From what has been said so far, it is clear that the right to information
defends many different interests. Interpreting the will of
the constitutional legislator The Constitutional Court in its judgment Ho
7/96 has expressed the thesis that in practice it is possible the emergence of
conflict of interest, but the basic will is based on the idea of
balance of these interests.

Therefore, the thesis cannot be accepted in any way
to the seekers that “the philosophy, spirit, and texts of the law are direct
directed against national security and statehood ”.

The public announcement of persons who have worked in
the special security bodies (DS, GA General Directorate and GA RO) of
the totalitarian state is an expression of the right of citizens and society
to receive information of particular interest and is
related to the formed public consciousness of reprehensibility of
the activity of these structures.

The disclosure of the names of Bulgarian citizens who
were full-time or part-time associates of the former State Security, the General Staff of the General Staff and

RO of GV in compliance with the norm of Art. 2 of the Access to
public information, which text introduces a legal definition
of the concept of "public information". That is why these
data are from the category of information that is related to the public
life in the Republic of Bulgaria and enables citizens to be
form their own opinion.

Last but not least, it should be noted that
according to the Decision of the National> Assembly, “the information about
the organization, methods and means in the implementation of
the specific tasks of the State Security bodies, as well as
the intelligence information of those authorities relating to or related to
period until October 13, 1991, are not considered to constitute a state
secret within the meaning of points 19 and 20 of the List of Facts, Information and Information
the objects that constitute a state secret of the Republic of Bulgaria
(promulgated, SG, issue 31 of 1990; amended, issues 90 and 99 of 1992).

The other essential considerations are also unfounded,
highlighted by the applicants related to the characterization of the created ones
with the law commissions - under art. 4, para. | and under Art. 4d, para. | from ZID ZDDBDS
as "political bodies". The approach adopted by the legislator for
their structuring in no way contradicts
the basic principles for the division of
authorities (Art. 8), as well as with the constitutional principles enshrined in Art
Chapter UT of the Constitution, relating to the judiciary.

These commissions are structured as bodies with a special status
while respecting the principle of separation of powers. Because
the verification procedure for disclosing the names of the Bulgarians
citizens who were full-time or part-time employees of the former
The DS, the RO of the HQ and the IRO of the GV, should be guaranteed from the point of view
of its independence and objectivity, and hence with a view to guaranteeing it
the truth of the established facts, the commissions are not in the structure
neither the legislative, nor the judicial, nor the executive
power. This eliminates the danger of political and
public discrediting, as well as attempts to manipulate and
extortion of individual citizens by distorting the facts.
> Strictly> regulated rules have been created to guarantee
the independence of the authorities to carry out the relevant inspection; and
legal guarantee of the constitutional right of the inspected
persons to defend themselves against incorrect decisions of the authorities under
the inspection.

In support of the above is the fact that the National Assembly with
Decision of 28.03.2001 (promulgated SG, issue 32/2001) has elected five
members of the commission under art. 4, para. | from the AIS of the VAT Act upon proposal
of five different parliamentary groups. Therefore, this committee will
be an impartial body that in no way could
to pursue "narrow party goals of those who defined it."
The manner of composition of the commission, as well as the overall regulation in
the law create sufficient guarantees to achieve the objectives of
the law under the conditions of equality and objectivity.

The claim of the claimants is also unfounded
in connection with the formation of the commission under Art. 4 g, para. | from ZID
The VAT Act, which is expected to consist of representatives,
appointed by the President, the Chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General.

First of all, it should be noted that the state
chapter, according to art. 92, para. and Article 93 of the Constitution, is elected directly
by the people, embodies the unity of the nation and in no way
is subordinate to the legislature and the executive. The determination
of the chairman of this commission by the president is a factor that
contributes to increasing the public authority of the body
guarantee of its political independence.

Next, I want to note that with the determination
of members of the commission - judges and prosecutors from the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Court of Cassation under
in no way extends> constitutionally> defined
powers of the Chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General. On the contrary,
the representatives of the judiciary in this commission are another
guarantee the impartiality of this body, as their status
in the context of the independence of the judiciary, combined with the high
their professionalism, as well as their obligation in carrying out
their functions to be subject only to the law will lead to the most
high degree on the one hand to achieve the objectives of this law, and on
on the other hand, will protect the rights and legitimate interests of citizens,
legal entities and the state.

The commission under art. 4d, para. | of the VAT Act, is not a body of
the executive branch, due to which the statement of
claimants that “judicial authorities appoint from their system
other executive bodies ”. Not for the first time in Bulgaria
legal system, bodies with a special status are established, independent of
the judiciary, the executive and the legislature, for which they can
the following examples are given: NRTC under the Radio Act and
television and the Commission for Protection of Competition under the Law on

protection of competition and others. Such a body is also provided for in
the draft Law on Personal Data Protection adopted at first reading.
Also, a permanently established practice is the appointment of
magistrates in the central election commissions to conduct
parliamentary and presidential elections, including the appointment in
these commissions are carried out by bodies outside the judiciary, such as
are the President and the National Assembly.

That is why I believe that bib 7 does not contradict in any way
way of art. 8, Art. 117 et seq. And Art. 153 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria.

Next in the exhibition of the group of folk
representatives are developed motives with which it is done “automatically
transfer ”of the affiliation of the heads of the bodies under
Article 4e, paragraph | on the manner of implementation of the legal and official ones
obligations of their subordinates who qualify as
"Fulfillment of party orders". Moreover - it is said that
"The working groups will not be bodies of catharsis, announcing
objective truth, because they will make a subjective judgment about one
past activity of the Bulgarian citizens ”.

Logically, the legislator has provided for the creation of these
working groups in the departments where the respective ones are kept
information funds. It should also be borne in mind that
the members of these working groups will be employees of ministries
and services which, pursuant to> legal provisions,
regulating their status are politically neutral and which in
performance of their service are governed by the law and the protection of
the rights, legitimate interests and freedoms of citizens - legally
requirement regulated in the LMI, ZOVSRB and ZDS.

In addition, those referred to in Art. 4d, para. | working groups in
ministries and services will consist of employees with rich
professional experience who will be required to do an analysis of
the documents of DS, RU - GS and RO of GV in compliance with
the requirements of the AIS ZDDBDS. The case concerns the establishment of
facts and circumstances based on specific documents
referred to in Article 5 of the law, which have their legal
certain material and formal probative force with respect to
of the circumstances to which they relate. Therefore, without
qualified assistance to these employees in
the highly specialized matter, the work of the two commissions under Art. 4,
al. | and Art. 4d, para. | ZID ZDDBDS would be very difficult and would

there were prerequisites for the emergence of risks to the national
security of the Republic of Bulgaria.

It should be borne in mind that the working groups will
perform only the preparatory activity for the processing of this
large amount of information and will not make disclosure decisions
of information, as the law provides for decisions to be made
only by the commission under art.

Summarizing the above, we can conclude that
that the texts regulating the status and activity of the commissions
under Art. 4, para and under Art. 4d, para 1, as well as the working groups under Art. 4e, under
in no way contradict the principles and texts of
The Constitution.

I also consider the applicants' considerations to be unfounded
the law is in contradiction with art. 4, para. 2, Art. 32, para. 2 art. 38 and art. 56 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as well as the principles set out
in the preamble.

Next, the applicants have developed the thesis of
damage to the good name, honor and dignity of citizens.

The constitutional legislator uses the term
"Dignity" as a term in various texts of the Constitution, through
which determines the principles for the regulation of the legal
position of the personality. In a democratic society, personality is
supreme value and its rights as well as its security are a measure
about the degree and nature of democracy. Along with the rights of the individual
is placed in the preamble of the Constitution and human dignity.
The constitutional legislator is already in the preamble of the Constitution
brought to the fore three supreme principles - the rights of the individual,
its dignity and its security. In this context, dignity
should be seen as a constitutional concept filled with
legal content and should be separated from its understanding as
moral category, which reveals a certain philosophical and
political content. Listed in the statement of the applicants
arguments in this direction are entirely based on the understanding of the concept
as a moral category. It is for this reason that it is difficult to
point out. legal arguments / counter-arguments /, and even less to
draw and present legal conclusions.

In the legislation on the right to information,
as is the case with the AML / CFT Act, the legislator has complied with
the requirement to guarantee the fundamental rights proclaimed by

The Constitution, namely the rights and reputation of citizens,
national security, public order, public health and morality.

Initially, belonging to the former State
security does not affect the reputation of the inspected persons. Theirs
activity was legally regulated. Undoubtedly, a big one
part of the collaborators of the former State Security are
carried out an activity which even today corresponds to the moral norms -
prevention and detection of terrorist acts, actions,
directed against the territorial integrity and national security of
Bulgaria, etc. This is confirmed by the fact that the law itself
protects those collaborators of the former State Security who
continue to cooperate with modern security services -
Art. 3, para. 2 of the AIS of the VAT Act. Their behavior is clearly not considered
for immoral and in this regard, one of the virtues of the law is that it
does not contain any evaluation moment and does not in any normative order
imposes a certain moral conclusion.

The purpose of the law is through the timely announcement of
sufficient data on the full-time and part-time associates of the former DS
and the former General Directorate of the General Staff, every citizen to be able to judge from
point of view of their own morals and views in each individual
whether the activity carried out was worthy of respect or not
was reprehensible. The opinion compiled on the basis of this category
public information will enable citizens to
form their civil position.

I also find the claim of the applicants that unfounded
6 2a, para. 2 of the Additional Provisions of the AIS ZDDBDS, announcing
“Carrying out activity as a full-time or part-time associate of
There is an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service
incompatible with holding a public office within the meaning of para.
1, item 1 ”, contradicts Article 6 of the Constitution.

This issue is resolved differently in different countries
way, in view of the established “national regulatory and
institutional frameworks and national traditions.

Introduced with the hypothesis of (2a, para 2 norm of
incompatibility between posts and activities is not an expression of
restricting the rights of citizens in the context of Article 6 of
The Constitution is an expression of the establishment and legal consolidation of
the constitutionally established principles of a democratic state,
proclaimed in the preamble of the Constitution. The cited norm
of the AIS, the VAT Act gives the right to choose to each citizen whether to borrow

one or another public office, respectively whether to perform
public activity, or to cooperate with the security authorities.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Please disregard what the group has done
MPs' representatives request for the full announcement of 9 of
the unconstitutionality of the Act amending and supplementing
The Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security / prom.
SG, no. 24 of 13.03.2001 /, or alternatively to be established
the unconstitutionality of 66, 47, art. 4d, art. 4e, 63, art. 2, 65, art.3,
para 1, items 1, 88, 821, 823 and 625 of the same law.
OPINION

by Emanuil Yordanov - Minister of Interior,
constituted as an interested party by definition
of 29 March 2001 in constitutional case Xe 7/2001

SUBJECT: Request of a group (54) of MPs from the 38th
National Assembly to establish entirely on
the unconstitutionality of the Amendment Act and
supplement to the Law on Access to Documents of the former
State security, or alternatively to establish
the unconstitutionality of 8 6, 5 7, art.4-d, art.4-e, 53, art.2,
85, art. 3, para 1, items 1,58, 821, 823 and 25 of the same law.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Pursuant to the definition provided to me by 29
March 2001 on constitutional case ХЬ 7/2001 possibility, as

interested party to make known its views in writing on the request for
establishing the unconstitutionality of the Law on
amendment of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former
State Security (AIS ZDDBDS, promulgated SG, issue 24 of 13.03.2001) or
alternatively to establish the unconstitutionality of 8 6, 8 7, art.4-
d, art.4-e, 83, art.2, 8 5, art.3, para.1, items 1, 8 8, 8 21, 823 and 8 25 of the same law,
made by a group (54) MPs from the 38th National
meeting and within the specified period I present the present. I find
the arguments and arguments in the request of the group of MPs for
unfounded for the following reasons, set out in the order of
requests:

1. Regarding the contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of Art.
Article 87, paragraph | and Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

I consider that the presented arguments for contradiction of the Amendments and Supplements
ZDDBDS with art. 4, para 1, art. 87, para. and Article 88, para! of the Constitution are
unfounded. This is because the applicants themselves accept that the law is
adopted in two readings, but challenged the constitutional authority of
MPs in the course of the legislative process to be able to
make changes to the bill.

At the same time, there is no constitutional requirement, and it would be
it was also absurd for the submitted bill to be adopted in the form in which it was
has entered. The National Assembly is the legislature, not
the submitter of the bill. It is his right and responsibility, with
law to fully regulate all major public relations
subject to a permanent system in the matter to which it relates. Absolutely
it is natural, democratic, and constitutionally imported
bills to be amended in the process of their
discussion in order to be able to meet the requirement for
completeness of the regulation of the respective matter to which it refers.

For these reasons, I find that there is no violation of
the legislative process, ie the constitutional requirement has not been violated,
enshrined in Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and the law was discussed and adopted on
two votes.

2. Regarding the contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of
The Constitution.

The statement is too general and not specified, but
the considerations set out by the applicants are primarily political,
and not of a legal nature. It is for this reason that it is difficult to point out
legal arguments (counter-arguments), much less to make legal ones

conclusions. I find this statement unfounded in the following
considerations:

Under letter "a" I do not share the statement that the commission under art. 4,
para 1 of the VAT Act will not be an impartial body, but a political one
such. The thesis of bias and bias of the members of this
commission is suggested by the applicants, fearing that
the majority in the National Assembly shall appoint the five members from among its members
circles, and the Council of Ministers, which is elected by this majority, will
appoint the other two members. The fact that for members of
the commission also elected persons from other parliamentary groups, as well as
the signing of an oath declaration according to art. 46, para 2 of the VAT Act by
the members of the commission are an indisputable guarantee of the objectivity of
the work of the commission On the other hand - the fact that
the legislator has provided for the commission to include persons
proposed by the National Assembly and the Council of Ministers, on their own
essence does not contradict the constitution. The right cannot be denied
of the National Assembly, nor can it be obliged what persons to
proposed as members of the commission. However, as mentioned above,
the members of the commission from the quota of the National Assembly are proposed
from different parliamentary groups.

The argument under point (6) is also unfounded. The way of
determination of the composition of the commission under art. 4d, para of the VAT Act is a matter of
legislative assessment of expediency and inherently not
contradicts any text of the Constitution, and is entirely in
the powers of the National Assembly. The arguments set out by
applicants may be relevant in the assessment of appropriateness,
but not for constitutionality. In this case, these circumstances are
irrelevant.

I do not consider it within my power to interpret the reasons
due to which the National Assembly has taken this decision. On each
the prevailing view is that the judiciary is independent,
protects the rights and legitimate interests of citizens, legal
persons and the state, and in the performance of their functions the judges and
the prosecutors obey only the law - an argument from art. 117, para. | and2
of the Constitution, as well as the consideration that the president embodies
unity of the nation - art. 92, para of the Constitution.

Judgments, whether the president, the attorney general or
the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation sympathizes with one or
other political force, are not legal and are irrelevant to the raised
dispute.

That is why I believe that the provision of Article 4d of the VAT Act does not
contradicts Article 8 of the Constitution, nor any other
constitutional norm.

The foregoing applies in its entirety to the arguments put forward by
letter "c" of the request, and the judgments made that created on
Pursuant to Article 4e of the VAT Act, working groups “will implement party groups
orders ”will make a subjective assessment and only“ naive people ”will
they have the illusion that the objective truth will be proclaimed, they are unfounded.

It is logical, and the legal logic is reproduced in the amended ones
and amended provisions of the VAT Act, such working groups to be established
in the respective departments, where the respective ones are> stored
information funds. In this regard, it should be borne in mind that
it concerns a legally defined assessment of specific official documents,
explicitly referred to in Article 5 of the VAT Act, which have their legal
certain material and formal probative force with respect to
of the circumstances to which they relate, and not to free interpretation
of these circumstances by expressing opinions or statements of
various people, publications in the media and others
similar. It should be borne in mind that the members of these working groups
will be primarily civil servants who according to
the provision of Article 4 of the Civil Servant Act must be, a
and are politically neutral, as in the performance of their service
govern by law and lawful acts of the bodies of
state power and the observance and protection of the rights, the legal ones
interests and freedoms of citizens.

Summarizing the wording of point 2 of the request for
declaring the contradiction of the Amendments to the Constitution to the Constitution, may
to conclude that arguments and arguments are given that rather
aim at derogating from the provisions of Article 67, paragraph and Art. 81, al! i2 from
Constitution than establishing the unconstitutionality of
the provisions of the AIS ZDDBDS

3. Regarding the contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of Art.
Article 32, paragraph 2, Article 38 and Article 56 of the Constitution.

I consider that the considerations set out are unfounded. By
these issues have already been referred to the Constitutional Court and ruled
with decision Xe 10 / 22.1X.1997 on constitutional case Xe 14/1997, which
I fully share.

 

4. Concerning the contradiction of 8 2 of the Additional
provisions of the VAT Act with Article 6 of the Constitution.

The argument that they are limited by that provision
the constitutionally guaranteed rights of citizens to be elected
or appointed to certain positions in the state is insolvent.
The Constitution in a number of its provisions - art. 68, para 1, art. 93, para 2, art. 110 and
others - explicitly provides by law to regulate activities that
are incompatible with the position of Member of Parliament, President,
Prime Minister, Minister, etc. Therefore, the constitution does not
absolutizes the rights of citizens, but on the contrary empowers
The National Assembly may by law provide for election or
appointing the persons who will best meet
the requirements for the respective position. What exactly are the criteria for borrowing
of the relevant position will establish the National Assembly is a matter of
assessment of expediency, which is provided by the Constitution
exclusively at the National Assembly itself. In this sense, I find for
the argument put forward by the applicants is irrelevant to the dispute.

5. Regarding the orientation of the AIS ZDDBDS against
“The national and state unity of Bulgaria” and the “national
security and statehood ”.

The applicants substantiate this claim with a non-legal,
philosophical exposition of his thesis and use assumptions about
the application of the VAT Act, on which it is impossible to present legal ones
counter-arguments. As far as there is a contradiction with two constitutional ones
provisions - Article 1 and Article 9, it should be borne in mind that the way in which
The National Assembly has regulated the matter with the Amendments and Supplements to the Law on Public Procurement, no
also contradicts these provisions of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria.

In view of the above, please disregard
made by a group (54) MPs from the 38th National
assembly requests to establish the full unconstitutionality
of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents
of the former State Security (AAS ZDDBDS, promulgated SG, issue 24 of
13.03.2001) or alternatively to establish unconstitutionality
of 8 6, 57, art. 4-d, art. 4-e, 83, art. 2, 8 5, art. 3, para. 1, items 1, 88, 8215-5423 and 25 of
the same law. -
DEAR MR. DANOV,

The opinion of the Ministry of Defense on constitutional
case Ho 7 of 2001, initiated at the request of a group of MPs
from ХХХУШ National Assembly "for" establishing FULLY
the unconstitutionality of the Act amending and supplementing
The Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security (promulgated, SG,
no. 24 of 2001), or alternatively to establish
the unconstitutionality of certain provisions of the law is reflected in
Decision He 247 of the Council of Ministers of 12 April 2001
from the NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE SERVICE
on constitutional case M 7/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The National Intelligence Service took an active part in
the work of the National Security Commission in the discussions on
the draft Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to
the documents of the former State Security between first and second reading
in the National Assembly. The position of the service to be provided
legal guarantees for the protection of the national security of the Republic
Bulgaria is largely reflected in the adopted Law on
amendment of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former
State security. Such a law to one degree or another turns out

negative impact on public relations,
related to> the national security of> the country, but> due to
the need to implement the> constitutional right to
receiving and disseminating information without it being directed
against the rights and reputation of citizens, national security and
public order was passed the Law on Access to Documents of
the former State Security, which with the exception of individual texts does not
was declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of
Republic of Bulgaria.

The Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to
the documents of the former State Security expands the scope of
the current law, but essentially regulates the same
public relations, which means that it should not
contrary to the provisions of the Constitution. On the other hand in this
law separate texts allow for different interpretations, which
will inevitably lead to serious difficulties in their implementation. IN
This connection typical examples are paragraph 4 of Article 4e, which requires a reasoned
a written report with a justified need not to disclose the name of
person not to indicate data from which his can be established
identity, and in the next para 5 by decision of the commission under art. 4, para 1
its members shall be provided with non-disclosed documents and
their common connection with art. 4g, para 2, which obliges the director of each
service at the request of the commission under art. 4, para 1 to provide the data in
link to any reasoned report 'without those from which it can be established
the identity of the person, of those affected and of third parties. Another one
a typical example are the texts of art. 9e, points 3, 4 and 5, which give
possibility to apply to all documents created before 25.02.1991

stored in the archives of modern intelligence services or

security without taking into account the fact that they are related to
process of activity, which makes quite a few of them relevant to
today's date, i.e. having a direct bearing on the national security of
modern Bulgaria.

The text of paragraph 2a, para 2 of the Additional
provisions, as amended by paragraph 23 of the law contradicts
entirely of the purposes and the period of time, provided in art. 1, para 1, as it affects
the rights of the full-time and part-time associates of the acting Bulgarian
intelligence and security services, including those that do not
nothing to do with the former State Security or the former General Staff, yes
may hold a public office under para 1, item 1 of the same paragraph. This one
text in addition to contradicting Article 199 of the Defense Act and
the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria violates the provision of Article 6,
para 2 of the Constitution for equality of citizens before the law and
non-admission of any restrictions on the rights or privileges established
of personal and social status. The proclamation of the text of paragraph Fa,
para 2 as unconstitutional will restore what was proclaimed by
The Constitution equality of citizens and will abolish the above

legal contradictions.
OPINION

SUBJECT: the request to establish unconstitutionality

of the Amendments and Supplements to the VAT Act under Const.D.He 7/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In accordance with the questions formulated in your definition by
March 29, 2001 in the constitutional case He 7/2001, I express the following
position:

1. In general, the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access
to the documents of the former state security (SG, issue 24/2001) no

contradicts the provisions of art. 4, para 1, art. 87, para. | and Article 88, para. from

The Constitution. The law is a two-vote vote held in two
separate meetings, which is in line with constitutional provisions.
After the second vote, the bill was submitted to the National Assembly
meeting of the leading commission (art. 68, para 2 of PODNS), cannot be
claims that the requirement of art. 87, para! of the Constitution.
The assessment of the constitutionality of the challenged law should be made
given only with a view to violating constitutional provisions, and not
of provisions of other normative acts, in which sense the permanent one is also
case law of the Constitutional Court (Decision No. 3/91, Decision No. 2/92, Decision No. 4/95
г., Реш.Ме 5/98 г.).

2. Act as a whole, as well as the challenged provisions separately,
do not contradict the provisions of art. 4, para 2, art. b, para 2, art. 32, art. 38 and
Article 56 of the Constitution (with the exception of 6 5 in its part regarding Art. 3, para 2,
0.76 ”of the Law). It provides mechanisms for the protection of
the dignity and rights of the individual - art. 2, art. 3, para. 2 and para. 4, art. for, art. b,
para 3, art. ba, para 4, art. 9, etc. The Act does not create any privileges,
based on any criteria (and not only those under Art. b, para 2 of
The Constitution). The publication of the report under Art. B, para 1 in conjunction with Art. 3, para 1,
item 3 of the Law cannot be qualified as “persecution” in the sense of
Article 38 of the Constitution. The names of the persons under Art. 3, para!, Item 2 of the Law shall not be
disclose because of their beliefs (which are irrelevant), a
only if those persons have been employed on a full-time or part-time basis
employees of the former State Security or the former Intelligence
management of the General Staff, or have benefited from them. Against
illegal inclusion of names of persons in the report under Art. 3, para!, item 3 of
The law provides for protection under the general claim procedure - art. Bg, which is why it is not
there is also a violation of Article 56 of the Constitution.

The need to verify certain categories of persons for

belonging to the former State Security and the former Intelligence

Management of the General Staff is a matter of expediency, which is

judged by the legislator - Resolution 10/97 of the Constitutional Court.

3. ZIDZDDBDS does not contradict also art. 8, art. 117 et seq. And art. 153 of
The Constitution. C 6 7, in its part regarding the new art. 4d, is provided
the activity of revealing the names of the Bulgarian citizens who were
full-time or part-time employees of the former State Security or the
the former "Intelligence" management of the> General Staff or
beneficiaries of the former State Security or of the former
Intelligence management of the General Staff to be carried out by a committee,
which is independent of the executive and is not broadcast by
representatives of the ruling or other political parties. In this
meaning> the legislator has also complied with the opinion of
The Constitutional Court, expressed in the reasons for Resh He 10/97
The powers of the chairman of the law provided for in art. 4d, para 2, item 2 of the Act
The Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General in no way affect the independence of
the judiciary. Regulating the manner of constituting
the commission under art. 4d of the Law so as to ensure its independence from
executive power is a matter of> legislative judgment for
expediency. There is no obstacle for the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Chief
prosecutor to assign separate powers by special laws.
Indeed, these are constitutionally prescribed bodies, but theirs
powers are not regulated in detail and exhaustively in

The Constitution.

4. The provision of 6 5 of the AML / CFT Act in its part regarding art. 3, para 2,

0.f ”of the Law, as far as the words:“ either against it there is or there has been
initiated and subsequently terminated preliminary proceedings for
such a crime ”contradicts Article 4, paragraph |, Article 31, paragraph 3 and Article 32, paragraph | from
The Constitution. The fact that a person has been sued

criminal proceedings cannot be interpreted to his detriment after

the criminal proceedings were terminated. Criminal wrongdoing
of the conduct of the citizens is established only by an effective sentence.
Persons who have not been convicted and convicted by an effective sentence,
they should be in the same situation, whether or not they have been opposed
criminal proceedings or not. The provision also contradicts
Art. 17, para 2 of the Constitution, as it calls into question
the lawfulness and fairness of the relevant acts terminating
criminal proceedings ordered by the bodies of the independent

judiciary.
Honorable constitutional judges,

In connection with the provision provided to us by the Constitutional
court of March 15, 2001 opportunity, we express a constitutional opinion
case M 6/2001, instituted at the request of a group of MPs from
ХХХУМШ National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of
separate provisions of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for
2001 (SG, issue 108/2000).

Basically, the request is based on the constitutionally guaranteed one
independence of municipal budgets and the budget of the judiciary,
established in the provisions of art. 141, para. Tichl. 117, para. Zot Constitution of
Republic of Bulgaria. At the same time (and quite rightly so), by reference
in the case law of the Constitutional Court are set forth arguments, determining
the request, emphasizing some significant differences in
the independence of the budget of the judiciary and the budgets of the municipalities.

NAMRB will limit its opinion to the provisions of the LSBRB for
2001, referring to the municipalities and only to those of them with which they are established
the most significant contradictions in the regulations.

The budgets of the municipalities are not only independent, but are also separated from
the Republican. In addition, each municipality has its own separate and independent
budget, independent both for the other municipalities and for
in relation to the republican budget. In this aspect, the relationship
between the republican budget and the budgets of the municipalities must be
established definitively and in full for each municipality separately through
The State Budget Act for the respective year, in this case shi
through the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001

With the attacked provisions of 822 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001 allowing
seizure of own revenues of municipal budgets in contradiction with
44, para. 4 of the LSB violate the principles of art. 141 of the Constitution and
in his three hypotheses. The four phases of the budget are axiomatic - drawing up,
acceptance, implementation and reporting. It could not be maintained that the budget is

 

financial sources determined by law in accordance with Art. 141,
para 2 of the Constitution. Seizure of legally realized own
revenues from a separate budget, regardless of their nature is
constitutionally inadmissible. Such sources are not explicitly mentioned among
the sources forming the revenue part of the republican budget,
defined in the Law on the Bulgarian State Budget, as well as in Art
the provision of para 3 is in contradiction with art. 9, item 1 of EHMS - the bodies of
local governments have the right to sufficient own funds, with
which can be disposed of freely in the exercise of powers
you are.

By sharing the findings set out in the request with regard to
the amount and nature of the subsidies under Article 9 of the State Budget Law for 2001, will be
let us emphasize the lack of a legally defined amount of
assigned state revenues for each individual municipality. Municipalities,
as we have emphasized, they do not have an aggregate budget, therefore the provision of Art. 8
of the State Budget Law for 2001 is insufficient to ensure compliance with Art. 42, para 4
from ZUDB. In the sense of this provision of the LSBB, the amount of the transferred
government revenue (as well as the amount of all other financial resources
support) must be determined for each municipality separately. By
In essence, in this case there is a refusal of the National Assembly within the meaning of
Decision M 17/1995 of the Constitutional Court on k, d. M 13/95

There is no constitutional obligation of the municipality to
performs functions in the field of social assistance. That's right
on the contrary, the guarantee of constitutionally irrevocable civil rights is
care and obligation of the state. Of course, no one excludes
the opportunity for municipalities to participate on their own initiative or by virtue of
law in various forms of social assistance to its citizens-
social patronage, public canteens, etc. But these are additional
forms in accordance with the specifics and capabilities of the respective
territorial community falling within the scope of competence as matters of
local character - ie outside the regulated obligations for aid under
UPR and social benefits under the SLA. In fact, the SLA itself refers to as
one of the sources of support and the municipal budget. In our opinion, however
these funds provided through municipal budgets should be
provided in full through a subsidy from the national budget - such as
expenses for performance of indisputably state functions, according to art. 54,
al. 2 of LLSGA.
OPINION

OF THE <COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
by “| constitutional case Me 6 of 2001
Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

The case was initiated at the request of 59 MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly for:

a / establishing the unconstitutionality of art. 1, para. 2c
the part under items 1111, 511 and 5.21, Art. 2, para. 1, vol. P, para. 2, para. 5 in the part
regarding the word "overfulfillment" and para. 8, Art. 9, para. You 2, art. 10, para. 1,
Art. 1, para. 1,2, 4 and 5, art. 13, para. 4 and 5 in the part concerning the words "the authorities of
the judiciary "," and the mayors "," Art. 2, para. 2 "and" Art. 9, para. 2, 8, 9, 20,
22, para. 2 and 3, 26, 30, 35, para. 2 and 37 of the Transitional and Final
provisions and appendices Me zi 4 of the State Budget Act of
Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (SG, issue 108 of 2000);

6 / establishing non-compliance with the challenged provisions,
relating to municipal budgets, with the principles of the European
charter for local self-government.

The Council of Ministers expresses the following opinion:

On the request to establish the unconstitutionality

of the provisions of Art. 2, para. 1, section P, para. 2, Bi 8

(budget of the judiciary)

According to para. 1, section P

The request maintains that section 1 in para. 1, determining
the costs of the judiciary contradict 129, 130 and 131 of
The Constitution, as it does not provide funds for the Supreme Judiciary
council, which is a constitutionally provided body and is an integral part of
the judiciary.

With Decision Me 17/1995 under cd. Me 13 from 1995, to which
refer also to the petitioners, the Constitutional Court has
stated that "annual budget laws are laws in formal
meaning only because they were voted under the name "law" by

National Assembly. Basically, their real content they do not
contain legal norms. In their expenditure part, they contain provisions
which authorize the state bodies to perform what they need
expenditures of state funds up to a certain amount.
The texts of the annual budget laws are acts by which
manage the funds from the national monetary fund. They are
management (administrative) acts, which without changing their
basic legal characteristics are issued inherent in
the acts of the National Assembly in the form (law) and in the manner provided by
the legislature procedure ....... Any law for annual
state budget of the country, which lacks funds for individuals
constitutionally established state institutions may be declared
for unconstitutional, as it paralyzes the activities of these
institutions ".

Insofar as there is no constitutional norm to determine
the mandatory content of the state budget must be
accept that the constitutional legislature has provided the decision to
this issue at the legal level. And because in the request are not expressed
doubts about the “constitutionality of> the relevant
provisions of the State Budget Structure Act (SBA),
governing this matter should be considered first and foremost
compliance of the> contested provision with the requirements of
special law.

According to Art. 22, para. 2 of the Law on State Budget, the state budget is adopted with
law on compound budgets, including their main types of revenues and
expenditures, the budget balance of the republican budget and its
financing, the total revenue and expenditure of the budgets of
state bodies and their relations with the central budget,
the relations of the state budget with the budgets of the municipalities and
relations with extra-budgetary funds.

With the provisions of art. 4 and 5 of the LULUCF, taking into account
the separation of powers and the requirements of special laws for
independence of certain state bodies, the legislator
has carefully defined the content of all the terms used in
Art. 22, para. 2 - "state budget" (covers the republican budget and
the budget of the judiciary), the "republican budget" (consisting of
central budget and budgets of public authorities) and "central
budget "(includes republican revenues and expenditures incurred
directly by the Council of Ministers or through rights delegated by it to
the Minister of Finance). In this respect, it should be noted that for
the goals of the budget process are not included in the concept by the legislator

"state bodies" the bodies of the judiciary - 5 1, item 1 of
The additional provisions of the LSDA.

From the above and not disputed by the petitioners
provision of art. 22, para. 2 of the LSBA, the conclusion that
the budget of the judiciary, which, although independent, is composite
part of the state budget must contain revenues and expenditures
of the judiciary, grouped according to the unified budget classification, but
not the revenues and expenses of the individual judicial authorities. There is no
a constitutional or legal requirement for the annual budget to include
the types of revenues and expenditures by individual state and judicial bodies and
the approach chosen by the legislator is the same with regard to
the republican budget as well as the budget of the judiciary. If
trace the structure of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic
Bulgaria for 2001, full compliance with the above-mentioned
above requirements of the legislator.

The applicants do not take into account the changes in the budget
process made with the Law on the Structure of the State Budget,
which has been in force since August 10, 1996. It repealed the Law on
drawing up and execution of the state budget, whose art. 2 determined
that the state budget is unified and covers the republican budget and
the budgets of the people's councils, and art. 12 - that the state budget is
compiles and submits to the National Assembly by types of revenues and expenditures under
ministries, departments and counties. A similar provision in the current
there is no structural law for the state budget.

On the other hand, the failure of the law to explicitly specify the costs
for the maintenance of the Supreme Judicial Council and the other judicial bodies
does not mean that the necessary means for the functioning of
these bodies are not provided for in the budget of the judiciary. IN
compliance with the constitutional requirement for independence of
the budget of the> judiciary> the legislator has provided
the distribution of the budget of the judiciary by the individual judiciary
bodies explicitly and only of the Supreme Judicial Council - Art. 23, para. 4 of the LSA.

In our opinion, the request is unfounded also because
the> arguments presented in the circumstantial part are for possible
unconstitutional refusal of the National Assembly to provide in
Art. 2 of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001.
funds for the Supreme Judicial Council (the absence of the
costs for other judicial authorities) within the total costs of
the judiciary, and the petitum has a broader content - to
found the unconstitutionality of the whole section 1, determining
the costs of the judiciary as a whole. As far as the Constitutional

a court is bound by the request made, the reasons for which are missing
such as unconstitutionality of the estimated costs for
the judiciary, the declared interest cannot be achieved through
the possible establishment and declaration of the unconstitutionality of
these costs.

According to para. 2

The impugned provision approves the budget subsidy
of the judiciary in the amount of 90 per cent of the determined amount under para. 1,
as the remaining 10 percent are provided only in case they are not
exceed the one approved by art. 1, para. 3 budget deficit.

It is maintained that the provision of 90 percent of the subsidy
turns the remaining 10 percent essentially into a subvention, like this one
way violates the autonomy of the budget of the independent
judicial power, which is made dependent on the person responsible for
the implementation of the state budget executive power. It is pointed out that
at the same time, to function properly, the judiciary is
obliged to make 100 percent of its expenses.

There is no constitutional prohibition for the legislator to introduce
rules for the process of implementation of the state budget. Not like that
is contained in Art. 117, para. 3, on which the request is based. Introduced
by the legislator rules on the implementation of the independent budget
of the judiciary, which includes the restriction under para. 2, are an expression
of the sovereign right of the National Assembly to adopt under
expediency restrictive norms. The attacked rule is
taking into account the fact that the budget of the judiciary is
integral part of the state budget and the purpose of this restriction is to
the size of the state budget deficit is controlled, not to
restricts the autonomy of the budget of the judiciary.

The claim that the difference from 90 to 100 percent of
the subsidy essentially became a subvention. In Rule
the subvention is an amount provided free of charge from the state budget
provided (provided, provided that it will be spent only
for the specified purpose), while for the "remaining 10 per cent" the presence of
the determined condition under par. 2 is a condition for their provision, not for
their consumption.

According to para. 5

The contested provision provides that overfulfillment or
the non - fulfillment of the revenues from fees from the activity of the bodies of
the judiciary is at the expense of the republican budget.

It is maintained that the legislator has provided for the seizure of part of
the revenue of the judiciary, which is an inadmissible interference of

the executive in the independent budget of the independent
judiciary. The petitioners refer to Decision Me 18/1993 of
KS on cd. Me 19 of 1993, giving a mandatory interpretation of Art. 117,
al. 3 of the Constitution on the independence of the judicial budget
power, as well as answers to some other questions. Saying that
drawing up, implementing and reporting on the budget of the judiciary
are outside the sphere of executive power and are an expression of
the constitutional requirement for autonomy of the budget of
the judiciary, the Constitutional Court says:

"But the independence of the judiciary budget does not
infringes the budgetary powers of the High Representative
body - the National Assembly. The National Assembly adopts the state one
budget and the report on its implementation, and an integral part of the state
budget is the independent budget of the judiciary ... The judiciary
power is supported by the budget. The sources of funds that are
necessary for balancing the votes voted by the National Assembly
annual expenses are collected through the revenue side of the republican
budget. The legal framework of the sources of funds of origin,
grounds and distribution is contained in the structural law for
budget ".

Revenues from fees from the activities of the judiciary indisputably
represent non-tax revenues of the state (Art. 2, para. 2 of the Law on Taxation).
There is no constitutional norm that determines that non-tax
revenues from the activity of the judicial bodies do not enter the state
budget, and in the independent budget of the judiciary. A question of
expediency and budgetary technique left by the constitutional
legislator to settle the ordinary legislator, is whether they will
come from the republican budget or from the budget of the judiciary
authority, as well as whether the necessary funds to support the judiciary
power will be provided entirely from the republican budget through
subsidy or the subsidy will cover the shortage of funds for
maintenance, unsecured by fee income.

We believe that incorrect para. 5 is perceived as restrictive
norm. Its purpose is to provide the necessary
funds for the maintenance of the judiciary. The quoted text from
the decision of the Constitutional Court in the request that the National Assembly should
"finally resolve all questions concerning the total budget
of the judiciary and the distribution of credit "can not
substantiate the opinion that with para. 5, the seizure of
revenue with unacceptable consequences for the autonomy of the budget and
the independence of the judiciary. The National Assembly has decided

"definitively" these issues by determining the specific amount of
the maintenance costs of the judiciary for 2001 and the sources of
funds for balancing them - revenues from fees in a certain amount
and a subsidy from the republican budget also in a certain amount. From
on the other hand, the independence of the budget of the judiciary does not
means that it can incur expenditures in excess of those adopted by the National
meeting.

According to para. 8

The contested provision provides that in cases where authorities
of the judiciary are housed in buildings owned by municipalities or
state, they do not pay rent.

The request alleges that the provision is contrary to the principle
of the rule of law, declared by Art. 4, para. 1 of the Constitution, since
contradicts several laws - the Law on Obligations and Contracts,
The State Property Act and the Municipal Property Act
property, consistently pursuing the rule that rent
legal relations are always remunerative.

The contested provision is completely different
purpose and its systematic place testifies to this. She
should be discussed and analyzed only with a view to
budgetary relations, on the one hand, of the state budget with
the budgets of the municipalities, and on the other hand, of the republican budget with
the budget of the judiciary. Its purpose is always (similar
there is a provision in the last few annual state laws
budget) was one thing - to point out and clarify to the authorities having
relationship with the state budget that rents for used by
Judiciary buildings owned by municipalities and the state are not
provided for in and not paid from the budget of the judiciary.
Apparently, the legislator has chosen an approach that he considered
appropriate in terms of the process of compilation and implementation
of the state budget. Instead of revenue for a budget that are
costs for another, balancing which revenues and costs indisputably
will be done through the relevant budgetary relationships he has chosen
the more economical approach - not to envisage spending on one budget for
the payment of rents in cases where revenues from another budget from
these rents will be reflected in the amount of the subsidy.

From this point of view it cannot be assumed that with para. 8 cited
substantive laws are violated - if the judiciary "does not pay
rents "from your budget, this does not mean that rents are not due and
the state budget does not pay them indirectly through the subsidy for
municipalities.

It is maintained that para. 8 also contradicts Art. 140 of the Constitution,
according to which the municipality has the right of ownership, which uses in
interest of the territorial community. No arguments are set out in what
the contradiction is expressed. We believe that the law of the municipality of
property bound by its obligation to use it in the interest of
territorial community, it does not follow that the property must bear
obligatory and only financial revenues for the municipality and its population.
The benefit for the territorial community is above all in the vicinity of
judicial authorities and government agencies to citizens, not c
income from these buildings From a formal point of view these
relationships could be settled in other ways, but
insofar as there is no specific constitutional norm for
the relations of the state budget with the budgets of the municipalities,
obviously the form of subsidies and contributions would still be used.

On the request to establish the unconstitutionality
of Art. 1, para. 2 in the part under items 1.11.1, 5.1.1 and 5.2.1, Art. 9, para. 1
and 2, Art. 10, para. 1, art. 11, para. 1, 2, 4 and 5, Art. 13, para. 4 iBv
the part concerning the words "the judiciary," and
the mayors "," art. 2, para. 2 "and" Art. 9, para. 2 ", 8 9, 20, 22, para 2 and
3, 26, 30, 35, para. 2 and 37 of the Transitional and Final
provisions and Annex M Zi 4

(the relationship of the state budget with the budgets
of municipalities)

The impugned provisions govern the relationship of
the state budget with the budgets of the municipalities and the methodology, based on
on which the budgetary relations are determined.

The petitioners refer to the constitutional principles for
independence of municipal budgets, for the obligation of
the state to support the municipalities to provide the necessary
funds in the state budget for the normal functioning of
constitutionally provided bodies and maintain that the state
The 2001 budget violates these principles by:

a / does not ensure the normal functioning of the municipalities and
their organs;

6 / does not ensure the independence of the municipal councils at
resolving issues of local importance due to the inability to
plan the funds for them;

c / does not fully cover the expenses of the local budgets under
performance of functions delegated by the state;

d / allowed by the Council of Ministers and other central bodies
(including the National Assembly) to seize the powers of

municipal councils for the compilation, implementation and reporting of
municipal budgets, as well as to make changes in them - reductions,
credit transfers, changes;

e / allows the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Finance to
seize the powers of the National Assembly, judging instead
him the draft budgets of the municipalities "due to a request from the municipal
council or by the mayor for subsidies, offer cuts to
illegal or incorrect expenses.

We consider the request to be unfounded and unfounded, as from
from the point of view of the Constitution the independence of the municipalities
budgets are guaranteed through the permanent financial sources of
municipalities determined by law and the law of local authorities
self-government to draw up, adopt and implement the budgets of
municipalities. In order to guarantee real local self-government,
the constitutional legislator has introduced an obligation for the state to
supports municipalities. Contributions or subsidies are an element of
the budgetary relations between the state and the municipalities and
insofar as there is no constitutional norm to regulate them differently
way, the legislator has the right to determine the mechanism by which to
achieve a balance between public and local interests.

"There is no constitutional prohibition for the legislator to introduce
rules for the process of compiling and implementing the municipal budget "-
Decision Me 2/2001 of the Constitutional Court under c.d. Me 10 of 2000. The draft budget
of the municipality, the compilation of which in accordance with the submitted
information from the Ministry of Finance is assigned to the mayor, no
is a final decision and does not affect the independence of the municipalities.
The order for drawing up and execution of the municipal budgets, the determination
of which is a sovereign right of the legislator, is irrelevant to
the autonomy of these budgets. Municipalities> implement
their normal activity by exercising primarily on their own
their budgets, and not through subsidies from the republican budget, the purpose of which is
to support this activity, not to provide it. The specific dimensions of
the subsidy for the municipalities is a matter of legislative expediency by
in terms of the possibilities of the state budget and the balance
between public and local interests. However, they are, even if they are
insufficient, in no way intended to limit
the independence of municipal budgets and the right of the bodies of
local government to make their own decisions.

The request contains an analysis of the relations between the state
budget and the budgets of the municipalities, from which the conclusion is substantiated that
the funds provided in the draft law on the state budget for

supporting the activities of municipalities should be relied on
the basis of the draft budgets drawn up by the municipalities themselves and not by
The Ministry of Finance should also have the People's Office at their disposal
assembly at the adoption of the state budget. We believe not
disputes the competence of the National Assembly to regulate
the relations between the state and municipal budgets - from the drawing up
to the report on their implementation. There is no constitutional norm to
obliges the National Assembly in the adoption of the state budget
to comply with the draft budgets of the municipalities. When accepting
the state budget The National Assembly is subordinated only to
the constitutional requirements and the laws adopted by him, as they
substantiate the public interests, the protection of which requires and must
be financially provided by the state budget. The constitution does not
presupposes a contradiction, and a balance between public and local
interests and the National Assembly is the body to which it has provided
achieving this balance.

The request unreasonably maintains that the unforeseen
funds in the state budget for 2001, guaranteeing in full
the normal activity of the municipalities, as well as in case of non-fulfillment of
the planned revenues leads to its unconstitutionality.
The provision of Art. 9, para. 2 of the law by which the subsidies for the municipalities
are approved in the amount of 90 percent, is perceived as a restriction for
the normal activity of the municipalities and violation of art. 141, para. 3 of
The Constitution. In view of the independence of the municipal budgets, s
the requirement to support the normal operation of municipalities, from
on the one hand, real local self-government is guaranteed, and on the other -
balanced support to municipalities that do not have their own revenues
or the amount of this revenue is not sufficient to resolve
main issues of local self-government.

On the request for establishing non-compliance with Art. 9,
items 1 2, 4 and 6 of the European Charter of Local Government
self-government

With Art. 9 of the European Charter of Local Self - Government for
the financial resources of the local self-government bodies are
defined rules and mechanisms to ensure sufficient
own financial resources within the national
economic policy for local authorities to implement
the initiatives taken by them, which are not excluded from theirs
competence or delegated to another authority.

A substantial part of these norms is reproduced in
The Constitution, the Law on Local Self-Government and Local Government

administration, the Law on Municipal Budgets and the Law on
the structure of the state budget, which contain norms analogous
of the specified international norms. With the material tax laws
the permanent financial sources of the municipalities are provided,
what is the requirement of art. 9, item 3 of the Charter. From this point of view it is
possible assessment of the compliance of international norms with these
laws that regulate the relationship permanently and their effect is not
limited in time, the establishment of
inconsistency of international legal norms with a formal one
a law such as the disputed Law on the State Budget of the Republic
Bulgaria for 2001, which, in addition to not containing legal norms (no
regulates public relations), is valid for the period from 1 January to 31
December 2001

In addition, the request in its part for the relationship between
state and municipal budgets is too general and possible
violations are not specified. As far as in the annual law for
the state budget these relationships have a certain monetary
expression if the importers claim that the funds are insufficient for
the normal activity of the municipalities in Bulgaria and the state budget
has greater opportunities than those estimated by the People's
assembly, must indicate and provide evidence to that effect.
The Council of Ministers could not comment on the appropriateness of
the specific amounts of the funds provided in the state budget for
2001 for the municipalities, and it seems to us that this also applies to
The Constitutional Court, provided that according to the Constitution this
it is a matter of the exclusive competence of the National Assembly and
there is no imperative constitutional norm.

Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

We hope that for the above reasons the request for
declaring> the unconstitutionality of the> mentioned> legal
provisions and the non-compliance of some of them with the European Charter
for local government will be rejected as unfounded and
unreasonable.
, REGARDING: The request of 59 MPs from ХХХУШ Народно
assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the following
provisions of the State Budget Act of the Republic of Bulgaria
for 2001, namely: of Art. 1, para 2, in the part under items 1.11.1,5.11 and 5.2.1.,
Art. 2, para 1, tP, para 2, para 5 in the part, regarding the word “overfulfillment
nation ”ial.8; art.9, para | and 2, art. 10, para. 1, art. 1, para 1,2,4 and 5; Article 13, paragraph 4 and

5 in the part, regarding the words “the bodies of judicial power”, and
the mayors ”,“ art. 2, para 2 ”and“ art. 9, para 2 ”; 69, 820, 8 22, para 2 and 3; 6 26; 6
30; 8 35, para 2; 5 37 of the Transitional and Final Provisions and
annexes Ho Zi Ho 4 of the same law

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

MPs have referred to the Constitutional Court with
request to establish the unconstitutionality of the above
above provisions of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic
Bulgaria for 2001. The request maintains that the specified norms
contradict the principles of the rule of law, the Law on
the structure of the state budget, the Judiciary Act,
Law on Municipal Budgets and are inconsistent with the European
charter for local self-government. By order of 15 March 2001
in constitutional case Ho 6/2001. The Constitutional Court is
admitted the request for examination on the merits and constituted
the Minister of Finance as an interested party in the case.

In view of the opportunity given to me by the definition, I express
the following opinion:

I believe that the request of the MPs is
unreasonable for the following reasons:

1 Under the budget of the judiciary:

Pot.!:
We believe that the text of Art. 2, para. |, Vol. Pot ZDBRB for 2001 c
its share of expenditures does not contradict the Constitution.

With Decision Ho 18 of 16.12.1993. in constitutional case He 19 of
In 1993, the Constitutional Court ruled that the budget of the judiciary was
independent. The executive bodies (Council of Ministers,
Ministry of Finance) do not exercise competence in the process of
drawing up, implementing and reporting on the budget. These bodies only include
the budget of the judiciary as an integral part of the annual
national budget, which the Council of Ministers submits to the National
meeting. With Decision Xe 17 of 3.10.1995. on constitutional case He 13
since 1995 it is accepted that the Supreme Judicial Council has a separate budget,
which is voted by the National Assembly in all its content as
budget of a body of the judiciary. The decision He issued 17/1995
refers to Art. 3, para 2 of the budget of the judiciary for 1995, which is
was adopted specifically by the judiciary, with the exception of
budget of the SJC. After 1995, the budget of the judiciary was drawn up in
compliance with Art. 196 of the Judiciary Act, which gives
an additional guarantee that the SJC will distribute and control to the maximum
expediently and lawfully approved by the annual law on
the state budget funds for the judiciary.

The provision of Art. 8, para. 2 of the State Structure Act
budget (SDB) clearly states that the budget of the judiciary consists
from the Supreme Judicial Council 's own budget and the budget accounts of
the judiciary. Given the provision of Art. 4,
al. | ichl. 8, para Fig. 2 of the Law on the Judiciary, the own budget of the Supreme Court
council is an integral part of the budget of the judiciary in its entirety
content. Therefore, the National Assembly has adopted the budget of
the judiciary in accordance with Article 196 of the Judiciary Act
power. The budget of the judiciary is a unity of the budget of the SJC and
the budget accounts of the judiciary and is adopted in
the annual law on the state budget, as required by the provision of Art.
196 of the Judiciary Act. In the specific case indicated

provision does not contradict either a constitutional norm or a
provision of another law.

The competence of the executive (Council of Ministers,
Ministry of Finance) does not cover the budget allocation of
the judiciary by judicial authorities, as this is entirely within the competence
of the Supreme Judicial Council. To entrust the executive to
distributes the budget of the judiciary by bodies, is
it is necessary to make changes in the Judiciary Act.

Pot.2:
Under Art. 2, para 2

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria stipulates that the judiciary has
stand-alone budget. Guarantee for the proclaimed by the Constitution
principle we also find in the provision of art. 4, para | of the Law on
the structure of the state budget, according to which the state budget
covers the republican budget and the budget of the judiciary.

Article 8 of the Law on the Judiciary defines the scope of the budget of the judiciary,
which includes all revenues from the activities of the judiciary
power and the cost of maintaining them.

According to Art. 9 of the Law on State Budget, the annual law on the state budget of
the country determines the revenues and expenditures of the state budgets
authorities, budgetary organizations and the judiciary and their relations with
central budget, subsidies or contributions.

The budget of the judiciary consists of two sources of revenue -
revenues from the activity of the judiciary and a subsidy, such as
the subsidy from the republican budget cannot be independent of
key macroeconomic indicators.

The annual law on the state budget, developed in the conditions of
currency board, imposes restrictions on the expenditure side of
the state budget, in which the budget is included as an integral part
of the judiciary. In order to maintain the budget deficit in
annual budget laws provide "buffers" through which to
minimize the risk for the stable financial development of the country.
They approve the subsidies of all state bodies in the amount of
90 Fo of their allotted amount, the remaining 1090 being provided if not
the approved budget deficit is exceeded. There is no constitutional
norm which is infringed by that provision. Sovereign right to
the legislator is within the adopted annual budget law to
determine the method of obtaining the subsidy. Nevertheless, in

In recent years, the subsidy for the judiciary has been granted in the amount of
10090 of the adopted by the annual law for the respective year.

Under Art. 2, para 5

In the course of the reform of the judiciary is not always possible
forecasts the amount of revenues from the activities of the judiciary
power. Art. 2, para 5 should not be considered unambiguously, only in the part
"Overfulfillment". In order to ensure the normal operation of the judiciary
system, it should be borne in mind that only it is provided
an additional mechanism to enable default
of revenues, the same to be covered by a subsidy from the Republican
budget.

With the budget of the judiciary, the legislator has limited the amount of
assigned state fees up to a certain level of expenditure,
defined in the annual law on the state budget and any excess
/ overfulfillment / above this level, as unauthorized by the legislator,
leads to the need to reimburse these state fees to
the republican budget.

Under Art. 13, para 5
In view of the above under Art. 2, para 2, we consider that the provision of.
Article 13, para. 5 of the State Budget Law for 2001 does not contradict the Constitution.

 

According to t.Z:

Under Art. 2, para 8

We consider the statement of the people to be> unfounded
representatives that the relationship between the judiciary and
the state, resp. municipalities are rented and as such should be
settle by the order of the Law on Obligations and Contracts. The law for
state property and the Law on Municipal Property, incl.
and the regulations for their application are special as such
repeal the general law. In this sense, the provision of
Art. 2, para. 8 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is constitutionally compliant.
The use of real estate - state or municipal
property, by state bodies of budgetary support, as they are
judicial authorities shall be carried out in accordance with
the principle of priority satisfaction of particularly important
public needs of the population from national or local
meaning, i.e. the use of real estate for “public

benefit ”, which is not in all cases equivalent to the extraction of
specific cash benefit / rent /.

The interests of the state and the municipality should not be
expressed solely in cash income / rents / from
the leasing of building stock. The legislator has considered that the benefit for
the state and for the administrative-territorial unit is a municipality
greater when the judiciary and government agencies are in
proximity to the population of the municipality, not when the state and
municipalities necessarily receive revenue from the buildings that these
authorities enjoy. In this case, the legislator has applied
the principle of equality between the state and the municipalities.

P. 9 On the provisions for municipalities

The expression “Budget of
Republic of Bulgaria ”is inaccurate, as according to Art. 4, para. from
ZUDB, the state budget covers only the republican budget and
the budget of the judiciary. Municipal budgets are subject to
The Law on Municipal Budgets

Under item 1: The subsidies specified in art. 1, para 2, item 5.1.1. “Subsidies
for the municipalities ”BGN 5378922 thousand are part of the budget
relations of the municipalities with the republican budget. The other
An integral part of the budgetary relationship are the contributions of
the municipalities to the republican budget under item 5.2.1 “Contributions from
municipalities ”- BGN 56,361.3 thousand.

The sum of the two components of the budget
relationship is 5378922 9 + (- 56361.3) - 481530.9 thousand BGN,
which is the number under Article 9, paragraph 1 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

In h9, para are allocated unallocated costs in
the republican budget for the municipalities in the amount of BGN 73,581.6 thousand.
They are determined in accordance with the Social Act
assistance and the Regulations for implementation of the Social Act
assistance - BGN 60,000.0 thousand, the Child Protection Act - BGN 1,600.0
BGN thousand, the Law on amnesty and return of confiscated property -
BGN 500.0 thousand, the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic
Bulgaria - 4 9820 thousand, the Law on> administrative-
the territorial organization of the Republic of Bulgaria - 800.0 thousand,
The Civil Servant Act - BGN 3,212.8 thousand. and in the implementation of
other laws - BGN 1486.8 thousand.

The nature of these funds does not allow the preliminary
distribution by municipalities, as they are provided on a basis
actual cost for each municipality.

In determining the budgetary relations of the municipalities
with the republican budget through the Methodology the amount of
the obligatory expenses for the municipal councils and mayors - salaries and
insurance payments.

The state supports the activities of municipalities through subsidies from
the state budget, the amount of which is determined by the Methodology for
determining the budgetary relations of the republican
budget with the budgets of the municipalities, taking into account the economic,
their economic and social development and the built capacities in
the different regions of the country. By means of mechanisms on
the methodology provides protection to the weaker financially
respect municipalities, through redistribution of budget revenues from
the municipalities on whose territory there are large ones built by the state
production facilities, the activity of which provides financial
revenues higher than necessary to meet the needs
of these municipalities. This redistribution is also achieved through recruits
funds in the form of a contribution to the republican budget only from
municipalities defined in the law.

In the budgetary "relations ф9 of the municipalities axis
the republican budget for 2001 cannot be reflected
the provisions of art. 212 of the Spatial Planning Act
(Spatial Development Act), as the State Budget Law for 2001 was adopted on December 14, 2000 / promulgated.
SG, issue 108 of 2000 /, and the Spatial Development Act was promulgated in 2001 / SG, issue 108. | from
2001 /.

Since the Law on Spatial Planning was adopted after
the adoption of the State Budget Law for 2001, the provision of Art. 36,
para 2 of the Municipal Budgets Act, given that there is none
funds set aside for the implementation of the Spatial Development Act in 2001.

The relative weights of the objective criteria are absolute
the same for all municipalities and are approved by the Methodology for 2001.

The municipalities before the adoption of the State Budget Law for 2001 were
familiar in detail with the specific calculations and dimensions of
budgetary relations and the amount of transfers
government revenue.

The National Association of
municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria.

After the adoption of the State Budget Law for 2001, the municipalities of the Ministry of Finance were
provided detailed calculations on the elements of
The methodology and the transferred revenues for 2001.

The State Budget Law for 2001 is compiled and implemented in accordance with
the provisions of the Law on the Structure of the State Budget, and not in
compliance with the Municipal Budgets Act.

The State Budget Law for 2001 contains detailed information on
the amount of the funds for financial support in the sense of art.
42, para. of the Law on Municipalities, regulated by Article 34 of the Municipal Law
budgets in the form of general and targeted subsidies and contributions.

It is not possible to determine them in the State Budget Law for 2001
specifically by municipalities the amounts of financial compensations from
the state and temporary interest-free loans, as the need
of the same is established in the process of budget implementation, as
for the republican budget as well as for the municipal budgets.

It is possible that the municipalities need the Republican one
budget should not be possible, and vice versa.

Providing with the really necessary budget funds for
supporting the normal activity of the municipalities, as well as of all
other budgetary activities and organizations financed by
the state budget is carried out according to the possibilities of
the state in the conditions of operation of a currency board in compliance
arrangements with the International Monetary Fund.

The statement that the introduced restriction under art. 9, para 2 of
The State Budget Law for 2001 contradicts the provisions of Art. 141, para 3 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and Article 9 of the European Constitution
we consider the Charter of Local Self-Government (ECSC) to be unfounded.
According to Article 9 of the ECMS, local authorities have the right, within
national economic policy, of sufficient own
means at their disposal in the implementation of
their competencies. In support of this claim relate
the reasons already set out, as well as the judgment in Decision No 9 of
2000 in the constitutional case Ho 6/2000

The restriction for granting the subsidies under art. 9, para 2 of
ZDARB for 2001 has no influence in compiling the municipal ones
budgets for 2001 and the formation of the size of the budget
deficit. The budget relationship in the case under Art. 9, para. -
subsidy, is included in full in the preparation of the budget, av
the implementation process is provided 90 percent. The other 10 on
provided under certain conditions, as a general subsidy and
do not have the character of a subvention.

In this sense the provisions of art. 1, para 2, item 5.1.1. Article 9, para. | and
al. 2 (including the Methodology under Annex Xe 3) of the State Budget Law for
2001 do not contradict Article 4, paragraph | , art. 141, a! and para 3 of
Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and are not inconsistent with Art.
9, items 1,2,3,4 ibot EXMS.

This conclusion also applies to the provisions of Article 13, paragraph 5 of the State Budget Law
for 2001 in its part “and the mayors ........ under art. 9, para 2”.

 

According to item 2:

According to Article 47, paragraph | of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria
the upbringing and education of children up to the age of majority is a right and
obligation of their parents, and according to the provisions of art. 51,
para 1 the citizens have the right to social insurance and social security
assistance.

These provisions do not give rise to any obligations on the part of the State
full funding from the same of social assistance and
child care. In this sense, social assistance and care.
children cannot be perceived as functions of the state as a whole
delegated to municipalities. The presented thesis does not correspond to art. 51,
para 3 and of art. 52, para 2 of the Constitution, referring to obligations and
special protection for the socially disadvantaged of both the state and
society.

In this sense, the provisions of Art. 10, para. and of Art. 1, para,
item 1.11.1 of the State Budget Law for 2001 are not unconstitutional.

According to item 3:

Under Art. PC, para. 1,2,4i5:

According to Art. 42, para. 2 of the Law on the structure of the state
budget funds for financial support of municipalities in
specific cases can be provided in the form of targeted
subsidies.

According to Art. 6, para. 4, item 2 of the Municipal Budgets Act,
targeted grants are provided in specific cases for
acquisition of tangible fixed assets and for the implementation of
regional programs and projects of national importance.

This does not exclude the possibility of the mentioned “specific
cases ”to be defined more generally - as certain requirements
and criteria for the distribution of targeted subsidies by areas
and size.

The provision to provide targeted subsidies for
implementation of regional programs and projects from national
significance presumably implies the realization of a certain
government policy, defined in both program and
project level.

The provisions relating to the mandatory prescribing of
the minimum costs for the objects in the list-appendix for
the ecological sites are based on the provision of art. 6, para. 4, item 2

 

of the Law on Municipal Budgets for the provision of target
subsidies for the implementation of projects of national importance. This
are the projects that belong to the goals and priority areas
of the national programs for construction of treatment plants
for wastewater in settlements with more than 10 thousand equivalents
residents and for the gritting of municipal solid waste.

According to Art. 1, para. 4 of the Municipal Budgets Act,
the final draft of the municipal budget is compiled on the basis
including the defined budgetary relationship with
The Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for the respective
year. In this wording, this text of the provision should
is interpreted broadly, i.e. not only in terms of the size of
relationships, but also in relation to the specific
or general prescriptions for the procedure for the implementation of these
relationships.

The provision of Art. 6, para. | of the Municipal Budgets Act,
according to which the revenue part of the municipal budget is formed on
the basis, including the subsidies from the republican budget,
are not imperative, in the sense that municipalities are not obliged to
accept and spend the targeted subsidies provided to them, if
consider that the related legislation limits theirs
freedom to determine their policy. The state provides these
subsidies for the implementation of a certain policy - the right to
municipalities is to accept or reject this policy by accepting or
denying them the earmarked targeted subsidies.

Pot.4:

The provision of Art. 13, para 4 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is included in
ZDBRB for 2001 at the insistence of a large part of the municipalities in
Republic of Bulgaria and at the proposal of the National Association
of the municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria.

The same does not contradict art. 4, para. of the Constitution of
Republic of Bulgaria, as these are the priorities in favor of
the population in the municipality, in accordance with art. 9 of the PSA. It's the same
necessary and with a view to exercising control over
the lawful and expedient execution of the expenses.

Shaw vol.5

The attacked norm does not contradict the principles of
the rule of law are regulated by the Law on State Property Law and the Law on Public Administration
the possibility and conditions for> creation and closure of
extrabudgetary funds and accounts. There is no constitutional norm, on

which 6 9 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001 and Appendix Jo 4 yes
contradict and violate.

Sweat. 6 relating to 8 20

We consider that this provision is not in conflict with Article 140 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, according to which the municipality has
right to his property, which he uses in the interest of
territorial community. The provision of 68 20 does not deny the right of
owned by the municipality or the state over the ones used by
organizations of budget-supported objects, and is the result of complex
budgetary relations of the state budget with the budgets of
municipalities.

The action of 6 20 allows for a more appropriate and
proper functioning of budgetary institutions. It should be
whereas these are mainly administrative structures which
perform state functions of national and local importance.
This applies to both budget organizations funded by
the republican budget, as well as for those on municipal support.
The provisions of Art. 2, para. 8 of the State Budget Law for 2001. and 8 20 of the TFP are
as a result of the urgent need to provide
appropriate working conditions for both the state and the
municipal administration and appear in the annual laws on
the state budget after the adoption of the State Law
property and the Municipal Property Act, ie since 1997

Sweat. 6, referring to 8 22, para 2

The existing "provision" on> drawing up
the municipal budget on the basis of the budget forecast of the Main
tax directorate for tax revenues from municipal budgets
for 2001 is imposed by the fact that the Republic of Bulgaria is in
the terms of the currency board and the indicators of the consolidated
fiscal program, including for municipalities, are agreed with
IMF. The need for this provision was caused by
the fact that in 1999 the municipalities exceeded the tax
forecast their budgets, as a result of which they created
artificial appropriations and realized unpaid expenses
as of 31.12.1999 in the amount of BGN 166.4 million.

Sweat. 7
With 6 22, para 3 of the State Budget Law for 2001 the state guarantees in
maximum amount of revenues from tax revenues in the municipalities

Oyudzheti so as to create security in the reception of local

budgets in terms of cost planning and management
them in the respective year. This practically enhances autonomy.
of local government, as the risk of incorrect forecasting of
the revenue part is borne entirely by the republican budget.

In the State Budget Law for 2001, tax forecasts are set
revenues in municipal budgets, which are based on
the trend in the reports for the previous years and the expectations for
next year, taking into account the change in indicators from
the macroeconomic framework, tax risks and others. On this one
basis local government prepares and adopts the local budget.

This paragraph does not confiscate local revenue. The increase
or the reduction of the municipal contribution in the direction of
the republican budget, as well as the transition from the contribution of
subsidy and vice versa, in practice represents the regulation of
inter-budgetary relations, so that the overall economic
effect for the municipality generated by a change in the economic and
social environment at the local level, not to reflect on so
the estimates set and accepted by the municipal councils.

The provision of Art. 44 of the LSA states that they are not subject to
payment of the additionally disclosed revenues and the realized ones
savings. Pursuant to Art. 44 of the LSAA and Art
forecasts tax revenues, it uses the budget forecast of
the state budget) it can be concluded that 6 22, para 3 of
The State Budget Law for 2001 does not change the meaning of these provisions under
in terms of revenue, which depend entirely on the actions of
municipal councils, but these are not tax revenues.

The main item of tax revenue coming to the local
budget, are the so-called "shared taxes" - a tax on
personal income and corporate tax called tax
for municipalities. These are part of the revenues of the municipalities that
the state has shared with the local government with one goal - minimization
of the risk of revenue default, based on a larger number
revenue sources (economically this is analogous to
investment portfolio).

A distinctive feature of shared taxes is the regime for
refund of overpaid advance tax which directly affects
the municipal budget. These taxes are entirely dependent on
the economic activity of the subjects and some of the elements,
influencing the forecasting of their income can not
be predicted. For example - changing the seat of
enterprise (the tax during the year comes to the income of one
municipality, and after the change a refund is requested from the budget of another
municipality, or inability to predict the decisions of the general

meeting of joint stock companies for distribution or not of
dividend, or population migration, it is related to the place of
filing the tax return and the place where you will effectively
the tax is paid, etc.

The smallest economically independent unit in the territory
of the country is the municipality. This means that when circumstances arise
accumulate only in a negative direction this can cause a crash in
local budget. At the national level, compensation is received
positive and negative factors, such as the result of accumulation
only in one direction is the report already neutralized, compared to
the tax revenue forecast is within reasonable limits of
the permissible and acceptable error.

The application of the regime under 6 22, para 3 will be carried out, only
when there is a significant change in the economic and social
activity in this region and this influence has reflected on
tax revenues so as to require a re - regulation of
budgetary relations only in respect of these revenues.

In this spirit I pay special attention that according to Art. 60 from
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, Article 44 of the Law on
the structure of the state budget, in connection with art. 7 and Art. from
The Law on Municipal Budgets and 6 22, para 3 of the State Budget Law for 2001 no
there is a contradiction.

The state determines the size of the rates and the base on
which taxes will be paid, the state collects tax revenues,
the state forecasts tax revenues, the state guarantees
tax revenues in the local budget. The general principle is that
the one who administers the revenue is also responsible for
your actions. The logical lawful and economic
it is an appropriate consequence for the state to assume this responsibility,
by transferring the risk of his actions to himself, and that is
made through the relevant legal text, which in practice is
reflected in 6 22, para 3 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

Pot.8

The provision of 8 26 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001 creates
conditions for regular payment of the contribution to the republican
budget and not to divert it to finance investment and
other expenses.

In the part under art. 44, para. from the Law on Civil Procedure is the statement that
the contributions cannot be determined by the State Budget Law for the respective year.
According to the provisions of art. 35, para of the PSA, the amount of the total and

the targeted subsidy to support the activities of the municipalities and the contributions

in the republican budget are determined by the State Budget Law for the respective
year.

The statement that the annual “ZDBRB
improperly uses the Mechanism to determine the total
subsidy and as a mechanism for determining the amount of contributions.
The applied mechanism is the Methodology for determining the budget
relations of the municipalities with the republican budget, whose
Components are the subsidies and contributions of and for the municipal
budgets and from and for the republican budget.

Pot.9;

After 8 35, para. 2 of the Transitional and Final Provisions:

The obligation of the municipalities to spend the available funds on
Housing Construction Fund for the construction of the dwellings of
owners of expropriated real estate is not introduced with
by-law, namely with the provisions of 8 35 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

The purpose of this provision is to provide financial protection to
a certain social group of citizens affected by past actions
and / or inaction of the state power, both centrally and
at the local level.

The reference to the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria in this case is illegal because of the executive
authority, in the person of the central government and local authorities
self-government, the regulations impose obligations under
the financial insurance related to the compensation of owners
of real estate, expropriated by the order of the repealed Ordinance for
real estate prices with an effective valuation of the property to
1.02.1991 (the date of promulgation of the Council of Ministers Ho 8 from 29.01.1991 for
price liberalization and social protection of the population).
The provision aims to cover financial obligations incurred
before the adoption of the Constitution (July 12, 1991), the Law on
local self-government and local administration, the Law on
municipal budgets and before our ratification of
The European Charter of Local Self - Government.

According to item 10

8 37 of the Transitional and Final Provisions:

The request to declare the unconstitutionality of
the provision of 8 37 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001. The provision of
funds for acquisition of tangible fixed assets and
major repairs of local municipal roads are carried out in

in accordance with the provision of Art. 42 of the Law on the structure of
the state budget. Failure to indicate their absolute size in
adopted by the State Budget Law for 2001 cannot be considered as
unconstitutional, because in its digital part the law is
voted by the National Assembly on consolidated indicators, c
in accordance with the provisions of Art. 22, para. 3 of the Law on
the structure of the state budget (by main types of revenues and
costs).

As for the right of the executive to
distributes these funds, it is based on the provision of Art. 28,
al. 1 of the Law on the Structure of the State Budget, referring
powers of the Council of Ministers in connection with the implementation of
the republican budget.

DEAR GENERAL CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In view of the above, I consider the request of the group of people
representatives for announcing provisions of the State Act
budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 for unconstitutional
and non-compliant with European Local Charter
self-government is unfounded and unfounded and as such
should be rejected.
OPINION
of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Financial Control

SUBJECT: Order of the Constitutional Court of 15 March
2001, with attached the request of a group of MPs, with which
The National Assembly is constituted as a party under c.d. M6 / 2001, for
establishing the unconstitutionality of provisions of the Law on
the state budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (promulgated, SG No. 108/2000)

d.)

At a meeting held on 29 March 2001, the Commission on
budget, finance and financial control discussed the definition of
The Constitutional Court of 15 March 2001, with the request of
group of MPs, with which the National Assembly is
constituted as a party under cd. M6 / 2001, establishing the
unconstitutionality of provisions of the State Act
budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (promulgated, SG No. 108/2000).
The Commission has adopted the following principles in relation to
the legal provisions challenged before the Constitutional Court:

1. On the legal nature of the annual law
State budget:

The annual law on the state budget is largely “a law
in a formal sense ”insofar as it is accepted as provided in c
The Constitution provides for the adoption of laws by the National Assembly.
However, the Constitution does not prohibit or restrict
inclusion in this law of legal norms regulating certain
public relations related to the implementation of the state
budget. In this direction is the long-standing legislative practice of
National Assembly.

2. Concerning the budget of the judiciary and the Supreme Judiciary
advice

The budget of the judiciary and, in particular, of the Supreme Judiciary
council is part of the state budget. The National Assembly, such as
legislative authority is competent to determine its structure, c
incl. to differentiate or not the budget of the SJC in a separate position within
of the general budget of the judiciary.

3. Regarding the compilation of municipal budgets:

3.1. The current constitutional framework stipulates that the authorities
of local government perform the functions of
decentralized government, they are bodies that
exercise public power and are part of the state. Their
powers are part of public authority and do not arise primarily
outside the country. In this sense, the existence of legally regulated
coordination mechanism between the different management units of
the state, incl. and municipal authorities, within the general
budget process is not unconstitutional.

3.2. The provision of certain conditions and requirements in
the law on the annual state budget related to the relationship
between> the republican budget and the budgets of the municipalities,
including the provision of budget subsidies, does not infringe
the autonomy of local self-government and the independence of
municipal budgets. This is because of these conditions and requirements
aim to strengthen budgetary discipline and ensure
the lawful spending of the provided by the state
funds. In this way, higher constitutional principles are protected
and values ​​such as the continuous operation of those provided for in
Constitution bodies, compliance with the law, and for
balanced development of the different regions of the country and support
of the territorial bodies and activity through the financial, credit and
the investment policy of the state (Article 20 of the Constitution).

From this point of view, it is not unconstitutional either
if in the annual state budget / resp. annexes thereto, adopted
on the basis of the transitional and final provisions of the law / se
provide specific methodologies for determining the budget
relations of the republican budget with the budgets of
municipalities for the respective year. This is exactly what was done with

the attacked Annex 3 to the State Budget Law for 2001. It is in the law for
the annual state budget should be determined in detail and
flexible enough these relations, given the dynamics of
economic life and financial condition of the state.

3.3. According to the Constitution, the Council of Ministers has
exclusive right of legislative initiative to submit to
The National Assembly of the draft annual state budget.
Therefore, it is not unconstitutional to require municipalities to
send their draft budgets to the Minister of Finance, who shall
draws up the final proposals for supporting the municipalities under
the form of general and targeted subsidies and unallocated expenditure from
the republican budget and to submit them to the Council of Ministers for
consideration.

3.4. The provision of special rules in the law for the annual
state budget, regulating certain relations, conditions
or parameters in the compilation and implementation of municipal
budgets does not contradict the Law on Municipal Budgets, which is
part of the budget legislation and is subject to the general ones
principles set out in it. In this sense, the principle is not violated
of the rule of law, established in Art. 4, para. | of the Constitution as
is stated in the request to the Constitutional Court.

On the basis of the above arguments, the Commission considers that
the request to declare the attacked unconstitutional
provisions of the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria Act for
2001 is unfounded and should not be respected.

The opinion was adopted by 6 votes to 4.
AGU DEAR LADIES AND GENERAL CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

With a ruling of March 15, 2001 under cd. 6/2001 The Supreme
a Judicial Council is constituted as an interested party in the case,
formed at the request of a group of MPs for announcement
the unconstitutionality of provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001.

The opinion of the Supreme Judicial Council, on the merits of
the case concerning the budget of the judiciary is as follows:

1. We support the considerations set out in the request for
unconstitutionality of art. 2, para. 1 of the State Budget Law for 2001.

Several decisions of the Constitutional Court related to the interpretation of Art. 117,
al. 3 of the CRB and especially Decision Xe 17 under c.d. He 13/1995 categorically
declare that the state budget, which does not provide funds for
the state institutions established in the CRB, including the bodies
of the judiciary is unconstitutional. In this case
is unconstitutional the refusal of the National Assembly to include in Art. 2, para. on
independent order, both the budget of the SJC and the budget of the SCC,
The SAC, the Prosecutor's Office, the courts and the investigation services. That's right
prepared the budget for the period from 1992 to 1998, inclusive, after
the entry into force of the ERO.

The SJC expressed the same clear opinion in the proposed
the attention of MPs draft budget of

the judiciary for 2001, in which it explicitly provided
distribution of the budget by bodies of the judiciary.

2. The unconstitutionality of the provision of art. 2, para.
2 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is substantiated in the request with its contradiction with
Art. 8 and Art. 117, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. The independence of
the budget of the judiciary, as a characteristic of its
independence, ”according to the applicants, excludes 9 interference from
/ the executive power in its compilation and implementation.
The grant of a subsidy of 9090 of the amount set,
according to the cited provision, it turns it into a subvention in the rest
part, the estimated costs being reduced by 1020, although
the judiciary must have the means to cover its costs
1009 to ensure its normal operation. This creates a danger
to provide the necessary budgetary resources to cover
the budget expenditures approved by the National Assembly under the budget of
the judiciary and it is made dependent on the executive, which
is responsible for the implementation of the state budget. Thus,
that provision should be considered unconstitutional,
because it creates an opportunity for the executive to intervene in
the implementation of the budget of the judiciary and difficulties in
carrying out the activity of the latter. It should be similar
the authorization and the unconstitutionality of the provision
of Art. 13, para. 5 of the Law in view of the reference to art. 2, para. 2.

3. According to the applicants, the seizure of income within the meaning of
Art. 2, para. 5 of the LSA RB for 2001 is inadmissible interference of
the executive in the independent budget of the independent
judiciary. This provision is not unconstitutional. After
as the judiciary cannot enforce the proceeds of the collection of
fees, imperatively determined in the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001, the difference may
shall be covered at the expense of the Republican budget. In case of overfulfillment
of fee income, the funds must still go to
The republican budget, as the expenditure part of the budget of
the judiciary is defined and only through it can it be decided
the question of both the surplus and the lack of funds of its common
volume fixed in the budget of the judiciary, adopted by the People's
meeting. Determining this amount as a law of the People's

assembly and not by the executive, therefore, does not contradict
of the methodology of drawing up and implementing the budget of the judiciary
power.

4. According to the request the provision of art. 2, para. 8 of the Law on the Republic of Bulgaria
for 2001, which provides that the judiciary,
accommodated in buildings owned by the state and municipalities do not pay
rents for their use, contradicts the principles of Art. 4, para. You
Art. 140 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. > The provision is not
unconstitutional. The regime of the objects of state and
municipal property according to art. 17, para. 4 of the CRB under constitutional
delegation is determined by law. ZDS and ZOB6S, issued on the grounds
this delegation provides for free provision
of legal entities on budget support of objects of this
property in connection with meeting public needs
of national and municipal importance. According to Art. 2, para 2, item 2 and art. 15,
al.al. Giz from ZDS, these are the properties of public state property,
provided to the agencies for the performance of their functions for
gratuitous management, which according to art. 16, para. 1 cannot
be rented out. This principle according to Art. 17 of the LSA covers
and the private property of the State in respect of the legal persons of
budget support, such as the judiciary.
The situation is similar with the properties, public municipal
property, according to art. 3, para. 2 and Art. 12, para. 2 of 3O6C. The last one
text provides for their gratuitous provision to legal entities
of budgetary support, thus satisfying
public needs of municipal importance. > Hired
legal relations are remunerative, which means that the provision of
buildings, state and municipal property of the judiciary
power without paying rent, ie is gratuitous, is not
to TU PTT OA TA GT GT TI PU TTTT D) etteteeet,
OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on
constitutional case Mo 15 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of 11 September 2001
we are constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case
Me 15 for 2001, formed at the request of 48 MPs from
XXXX National Assembly for mandatory interpretation of Art. 113, para. 1
in connection with Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria under
the question: can the members of the Council of Ministers take and
the position of "mayor", performed by them in their election as ministers.

According to Art. 113, para. 1 of the Constitution, the members of
The Council of Ministers cannot hold office and perform
activities that are incompatible with the situation of the people
representative. Accordingly, Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution provides that
MPs cannot run another state
service or carry out an activity which is incompatible with the law
with the position of Member of Parliament.

Article 68, para. 1 of the Constitution contains two hypotheses of
incompatibility. "The first> hypothesis is incompatibility> between
the position of an MP and the implementation of another
civil service. The second hypothesis is an incompatibility between
the position of an MP and carrying out activities,
specified by law.

The interpretation that MPs want has been imposed before
all to answer the question of whether the position
“Mayor” is the performance of a civil service within the meaning of Art. 68, para. 1 of
The Constitution, ie whether the first incompatibility hypothesis is present
under Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution.

The Constitutional Court has repeatedly had occasion to express
its opinion on the meaning of the term "civil service", p
which it is used in the Constitution and in particular as to the meaning, p
which it is used in Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution. In the reasons to
Decision Mo 5 of 1993 on constitutional case Ko 6 for 1993 states:

Undoubtedly, the term "civil service" must be understood by
unified and consistent meaning. In general, this is an activity
performing the functions of the state. This activity is performed by
the name of the state and for exercising the powers provided for in
The Constitution is its organs. "

The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in a Decision
Me 16 of 1997 on constitutional case Mo 8 for 1997, as well as in Decision
In 2001, on the constitutional case Mo 9 for 2001.

We fully share the opinion of the Constitutional Court
on the unified and consistent meaning of the term “state
service ”as an activity for performing the functions of the state,
which is done on behalf of the state and for implementation
the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution. We believe
that the activity carried out by the mayor is undoubtedly an activity under
performing the functions of the state, which he performs on behalf of
of the state and for the exercise of its powers
constitutional body. According to Art. 1, para. 2 of the Constitution Republic
Bulgaria is a unified country with local self-government. This means that

the state power is unified and according to art. 8 of the Constitution it is divided
of legislative, executive and judicial, not of state power and of
municipal government. Article 139, para. 1 of the Constitution defines the mayor as
executive body in the municipality, and in the above
Judgment Me 5 of the 1993 Constitutional Court also states:

"In principle, the term" civil service "is used in
administrative law, where it is associated with public administration
and the state administration, i.e. with the functions of the executive.
- .. The conclusion is that the provision of Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution creates
ban on MPs to perform any
functions of the state (regardless of their subject and form) outside
the sphere of the legislature. "

These reasons in the decision of the Constitutional Court give
reason to conclude that the mayor as an executive body
authority in the municipality performs civil service within the meaning of Art. 68, para. 1
of the Constitution.

The conclusion of the Constitutional Court regarding the scope of the prohibition under
Art. 68, para. 1, compliant with the reference in Art. 113, para. 1, means that
The Constitution prohibits members of the Council of Ministers from
perform any other functions of the state outside the functions
their Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister or
Minister. After Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution does not allow
combining the position of "Member of Parliament" with the position of "Mayor",
combining the position of "minister" with the position of "mayor" would also
was unconstitutional.

The adoption of this conclusion requires an answer to
the question whether the expression "cannot perform another civil service",
used in Art. 68, para 1, establishes incompatibility between two state
services (in this case between the post of "mayor" and the post of "minister") or
only a temporary suspension of the implementation of
official duties arising from the other civil service,
whatever would be available when taking leave for the duration of the loan
the other civil service.

To> clarify the content that the constitutional
legislator has put in this expression, the wording of
Art. 68, para. 1 with that of art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution. While Art. 65, para. 2,
whose addressee are the candidates for MPs, speaks for
interruption of the performance of the civil service, Art. 68, para. 1
prohibits the performance of another civil service. With Decision Me 16 of
1997 on constitutional case Mo 8 for 1997. The Constitutional Court is
ruled that:

The expression "interrupt the implementation" within the meaning of Art. 65, para. 2 of
The constitution means that the candidate for MP after
the registration retains the civil service he holds, but does not
exercise his functions. If he is not elected as a Member of Parliament,
their implementation will continue. "

Therefore, in the Constitution, the suspension of
the performance of the functions as is available on leave is determined
as interruption of the performance of the civil service. In that
situation and after Art. 68, para. 1 unlike art. 65, para. 2 does not talk about
interrupt the execution, and prohibit the execution of another
civil service, it should be assumed that Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution
implies incompatibility between two public services and creates
ban on their simultaneous occupation. This means that the members of
The Council of Ministers may not hold any other public office for
during their time as Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister
presidents or ministers, and after their election must leave
the other civil service, not just to suspend
the performance of the functions of this service.

In the present case, the second hypothesis provided for in
Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution, as the incompatibility between the two
duties also stems from a statutory ban on simultaneous
holding the position of “MP” and the position of “met”.
According to Art. 37, para. 4 of the Local Elections Act when popular
representative is elected mayor of a municipality, he ceases to be
MP. The term used in the legal text, a
namely, "ceases to be a Member of Parliament", in an indisputable way

imposes the conclusion that the Law on Local Elections does not allow for reconciliation
to the position of mayor with the position of "Member of Parliament", and this
means incompatibility with the position of "minister" in accordance with Art.
113, para. 1 of the Constitution.

Based on the above arguments, we believe that Art. 113,
al. 1 in connection with art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution prohibits the members
of the Council of Ministers to hold the position of "mayor" held by them at
their election as ministers.

JUDGMENT № 10
Sofia, 29 October 2002
constitutional case № 12/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Margarita Zlatareva
(Promulgated, SG No. 103 of 5 November 2002)

Composition: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva - Rapporteur, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

I

The Constitutional Court was seised with a request by a panel of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fifth Civil Division to rule on the constitutionality of the provision of § 5, para 1 of the transitional and final provisions of the Cooperatives Act (TFP), promulgated, SG, no. .113 of 28.12.1999

The submitters of the request limit their complaints only to the case in which cooperatives and cooperative unions are terminated by right and when they have changed their statutes in accordance with the requirements of the new LC, but after the deadlines under § 2 and § 3 TF of the LC. For these cases in the reasonable part of the request it is maintained that the said provision contradicts the constitutionally guaranteed right of association, enshrined in Article 44, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. It is also alleged that there is an internal contradiction between the disputed legal provision and the consistent principle in the Cooperatives Act - only the general meeting of the cooperative to decide to terminate the cooperative, which contradiction also leads to unconstitutionality. It is concluded that the Constitution declares the obligation of the law to create a condition for cooperation and not to interfere with this activity, so the provision of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA does not comply with Article 19, paragraph 4 of the Constitution.

With a ruling of 25.06.2002, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration on the merits regarding the constitutionality of the provision of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA, regardless of the cases that may arise in practice during its application. The Supreme Court of Cassation, the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice, the Prosecutor General, the Supreme Bar Council, and the Central Cooperative Union have been constituted as interested parties in the case.

ІІ

Pursuant to the opportunity provided to them by the Constitutional Court, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice and the Supreme Bar Council submitted opinions on the case.

The opinions of all interested parties who expressed their opinion maintain that the challenged provision of the Cooperatives Act does not contradict the Constitution.

The opinion of the Council of Ministers states that, on the contrary, § 5, para 1 of the TFP of the Insurance Code ensures compliance with the principle of the rule of law by sanctioning behavior inconsistent with the law. The same is maintained by the Minister of Justice, who states that the purpose of the disputed provision is to stimulate the lawful conduct of cooperatives. According to the Supreme Bar Council, the provision of § 5 TFR of the Insurance Act implements the principle of equality of legal entities before the law - of newly established cooperatives in accordance with the requirements of the new legal regime and existing cooperatives obliged to bring their statutes in line with this regime.

The other constituted parties do not comment.

III

The Constitutional Court, discussing the considerations set out in the request, as well as the written opinions of the interested parties, adopted the following:

1. According to the disputed provision of § 5, para 1 TFP of the LC, the cooperatives and cooperative unions are terminated by right if within 9 months from the entry into force of the law they do not change their statutes in accordance with the requirements of the new Law on Cooperatives. 14 days from the adoption of the changes do not request entry in the register at the district court the circumstances subject to entry.

The purpose of § 5, para 1 TFP of the Insurance Code, evident from the motives of the legislator in the adoption of the first reading of the law (stenographic diaries of the XXXVIII National Assembly, 7th session, 254 sitting of 29.04.1999), is to equalize the status of the existing cooperatives with those that will be established under the new law, due to the significant difference in the regulation of their legal regime.

2. The termination of the cooperatives and the cooperative unions by law is related to the constitutional principles of art. 12, para 1 and art. 19, para 4 of the basic law - the cooperative is a voluntary association of natural persons, which through mutual assistance and cooperation carry out commercial activity, and the cooperative unions are legal associations of cooperatives.

The constitutional bases of the associations of the citizens in all forms of their manifestation are outlined in art. 12, para 1 of the Constitution. The general criterion of the purpose of the association is the interest of the members - the associations must serve to satisfy and protect their interests, which can be both economic and non-profit.

However, the Constitution does not determine the rules for the formation of various associations of citizens, including cooperatives. The law is the one that creates the conditions for cooperation and other forms of association of citizens to achieve economic and social progress - Article 19, paragraph 4 of the Constitution. The term “creates conditions” used by the Constitution should be understood not only as an obligation of the legislator to provide good conditions for economic activity, but also as a right of the legislator to determine the rules of this activity. It follows that the change of the conditions for cooperation is also determined by law.

The constitutional principle of art. 19, para 4 extends also to the cooperative unions, because it assigns to the law to create conditions for association of legal entities as well.

These are the constitutional principles on which the legal regime of cooperatives and cooperative unions should be based, and within which any legal amendment must fit.

3. With the Cooperatives Act of 1999. changes the legal regime of cooperatives and cooperative unions, established by the law of the same name from 1991, and in its transitional and final provisions it is imposed on the obligation of the existing cooperatives and cooperative unions to bring their statutes in line with the new legal permits. Failure to comply with this obligation is subject to the sanction of termination of the defective cooperative or cooperative union, respectively a fine for their governing bodies.

Whether the obligation to comply with the new requirements of the law will be strengthened by the sanction of termination of existing legal entities, a fine or replacement of the rules of the statute with mandatory legal norms while maintaining the legal capacity of legal entities (eg § 1, para 1 TFP of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities, § 10, para 1 TFR of the Commercial Law), this is decided by the legislator.

In this case, the termination by law was chosen as a sanction for non-compliance with the new legal regime and this legislative decision does not affect the right of association of the cooperators, in what direction are the complaints in the request. The members of the cooperative can remain united as one civil society under the CPA. The provision of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA takes away only the legal capacity of the organization, which legal capacity is initially obtained through actions of public order prescribed by law.

Providing for the termination by right of the cooperatives after the occurrence of the conditions specified in § 5, para 1 TFR of the Insurance Act, the disputed provision does not harm the constitutionally guaranteed interests of the cooperatives. It provides for reasonably long deadlines for bringing the statutes in line with the new legal regime, which protects the interests of its members and the provision remains in accordance with the constitutional requirement of Article 12, paragraph 1.

The opinion cannot be accepted that the termination by right, chosen by § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA, hinders the cooperation, raised as a constitutional order by art. 19, para 4 of the Basic Law. As already mentioned, the law determines the conditions for cooperation, the conditions for merging of cooperatives and precisely for the commercial entities that have complied with the law is the constitutional guarantee of art. 19, para 4. In addition, the principle of the rule of law - Article 4 of the Constitution, requires the stimulation of conduct in accordance with the law.

The compliance of the statutes of the existing cooperatives with the requirements of the new regime is also imposed by the constitutional principle for providing all legal entities with equal legal conditions for economic activity - Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The created new legal regime of the cooperatives differs in separate parts significantly from the previous one, which in view of the unification could not be applied without amending the statute of the cooperative and the subsequent actions.

Unification of the rules under which the existing and newly established cooperatives operate ensures the same legal conditions for economic activity, both for the cooperatives themselves and for their counterparties. As already mentioned, on the one hand, citizens' associations must serve to satisfy and protect the interests of the members themselves. On the other hand, the security of other legal entities in the general economic and public life must be protected, so the state makes sure that the rules for the establishment of the cooperative are clearly defined. The framework set by law for the conditions for cooperation creates a balance between the interests of the citizens who formed the cooperative and the interests of the state and the rest of the citizens who do not participate in the cooperative. The maintenance of conduct in accordance with the law is required of all participants in legal life in view of the existence of a certain, created by the state security and definability of legal relations.

4. The Constitutional Court does not find any internal contradiction between the power of the general assembly of the cooperative to decide its termination and the termination of the cooperative by right through the disputed provision, which would lead to unconstitutionality of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA, as claims in the request.

The Law on Cooperatives provides different grounds for termination of the cooperative: voluntary termination - by decision of the General Meeting; termination upon occurrence of objective conditions - expiration of term, stay with members less than 7 people, non-commencement of activity within 1 year; termination due to culpable conduct - by decision of a district court in violation of the law. The termination of the cooperative by right provided for in § 5, para 1 TFP of the Insurance Code is a ground beyond the above, approaching the subjective grounds rather than the objective facts, but it is not the only one that is based on inconsistent with the law of conduct.

It is possible that the application of § 5, para 1 of the TFP of the Insurance Code may give rise to unfair resolution of some cases. The Supreme Court of Cassation is the one that has the right to interpret the norm in favor of the law in combination with the justice of life.

The Constitutional Court in this case cannot discuss the fair application of the provision. It is necessary and sufficient to state that the provision of § 5, para 1 TFP of the Insurance Code does not conflict with the other grounds for termination of the cooperation, does not lead to internal contradiction of the law, and hence to unconstitutionality, therefore this argument for incompatibility of the provision with the Constitution is unfounded.

Based on the stated considerations and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of a panel of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fifth Civil Division for establishing the unconstitutionality of the provision of § 5, para 1 of the transitional and final provisions of the Cooperatives Act (promulgated, SG No. 113 of 28.12.1999) .

 

 
Special opinion of Judge Todor Todorov

In Article 106 of the Constitution is governed by one of the powers of the Ministers Council - to " organize the management of state property ." According adopted by court interpretation of the provision separation of powers and independence of the judicial power " exclude the possibility Ministers Council directly or through other     authorities to exercise powers in the management of state property ", conferred on the judicial power . The power in the organization of management is limited solely to the issue of the act (" to be shared and entrusted to the judicial authority for managing specific public property ") by which to empower authority of the judicial power to manage the property . With the issuance of such act constitutionally established function of executive power is exhausted .

I do not share this understanding . It seems to me is , that it starts from the premise of conflict between the interests of the executive and judicial authority and not by constitutional presupposed interaction between the two authorities . Sure is , the wording of Article 106 of the Constitution was adopted on practical considerations , for to be given the opportunity of Ministers Council to be unloaded from the manifold and complex activity in which to express management . This however does not mean , that the organization of management need to be opposed to mere housekeeping . In linguistic terms any management includes and elements of organization . In life two things fundamentally are inextricably linked and there is no rational basis for separating them in the constitutional framework .         

From the view point of the Constitution as any power , so and that a 106 has two sides - right and obligation . The power under Article 106 of the Constitution not be limited to the obligation given property to be submitted to the judicial authorities . In this power is included and the right of executive power in individual cases by appropriate to take direct action by management , as " maintenance " of the building fund . Nothing in the Constitution or in current practice of the Constitutional Court does not give grounds to be challenged this conclusion . What is more important, however , is something else . The organization of the management generally presupposes cooperation between the authorities . The Constitution does not imply and does not regulate the organization of management in terms of conflict .       


Special opinion of Judge Penka Tomcheva

I do not share the decisive conclusion of the majority and the accompanying motives in the interpretative part under item “A”, which in my opinion are an interpretation of previous interpretative decisions of the Constitutional Court, adapted to the needs of the specific case. The decision lacks an interpretation of the notion of “independent judiciary” regarding the scope of this independence, again referring to other decisions of the Constitutional Court in which this issue is not discussed.

1. The separation of powers under Article 8 of the Constitution should not be understood as an absolute separation of each of the three authorities, the existence of each of them for itself and isolated from the other two. Each of the three authorities acts independently in the respective state area for which it is constitutionally intended, and the three authorities are jointly united by and subordinated to basic principles of the Constitution, the most important of which for specific interpretative issues are: The Republic of Bulgaria is a single state - Article 2, paragraph 1; The Republic of Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law - Article 4, and the state is liable for damages caused by illegal acts or actions of its bodies and officials - Article 7 of the Constitution.

As working parts of a whole, the three authorities, through their specific powers and competencies in their fields, mutually exercise the state power and it cannot exist without any of them. In simple terms, the legislature creates the rules, the executive ensures and organizes the application of the rules and the judiciary monitors compliance with the rules and sanctions (not only in the criminal sense) when they are violated. The judiciary cannot perform its functions without the rules created by the legislature and without their manifestation, application in life, incl. by the executive authorities and by all other members of society (citizens, legal entities, business and economic entities, etc.).

2. Having ruled in Art. 117, para 2 of the Constitution that the judiciary is independent, the constitutional legislator has explicitly indicated in what this independence is expressed. The second sentence of the cited constitutional norm states that in the performance of their functions judges, jurors, prosecutors and investigators shall be subject only to the law. These are the parameters of the constitutionally established independence of the judiciary, ie. it is not a question of absolute independence, but of independence within the law. The independence of the judiciary in the face of its bodies, collectively called magistrates, is concentrated within the framework of law enforcement and the administration of justice.

Insofar as, in addition to laws (rules established by the legislature), other conditionally named “instruments” are needed for the implementation of the activity of the judiciary, such as buildings, furniture, technical devices, stationery - in summary, a set of material conditions in the context of the above. above for the separation of powers, I believe that the provision of material conditions is in the prerogatives of the executive branch, it is constitutionally obliged to provide the material conditions necessary for the functioning of the judiciary. Part of them are provided by the independent budget of the judiciary - Article 117, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, and another part, regarding the building stock - by the order of Article 106, by the Council of Ministers.

3. To which body from which authority, resp. to which specific entity the Council of Ministers will provide the management of the designated material base is a matter of operational nature, which is not bound by constitutional requirements. It is enough for the constitutionally obliged Council of Ministers as a supreme body of the executive power to organize the use of state property in such a way - Article 106 of the Constitution that the judiciary can function without problems. Therefore, there is no constitutional obstacle to the management of the state property necessary for the functioning of the judiciary to be provided to both a body of the judiciary and a body of the executive power, resp. of another duly authorized legal entity. There is also no constitutional obligation, arising from Art. 8 and Art. 117, para 2, to manage the management of this property only, exclusively and only to the respective bodies of the judiciary.
Special opinion of Judge Rumen Yankov

Undoubtedly, the essence of the interpretive question is regards to the status of state property , invoked by judicial authorities for implementation of the functions it.

So far, no is no dispute , that Ministers Council determines by whom and in what order will be managed this property , except if a law not been provided otherwise . A particular case of 1995 has imposed unchallenged by anyone clarify , that in cases , in which at government buildings - public property , are housed judicial institutions , unacceptable is without express their consent to be issued unilateral acts of administration by appropriate . In this sense, it is the decision by k.d . № 23 of 1995

In this decision is made retreat from principled position , that " organized management " in the final bill is uniform power . Only practical impossibility Ministers Council unilaterally to carry out intricate work in management is imposed , it can be provided in separate bodies and organizations .

Destructive interpretation in case there is a consequence decomposition of uniform power , without to be made argument in this direction . And it lacks not due to any flaw , but because the very constitutional provision of Article 106 in that its part does not give grounds for another conclusion . The term " organized " is ambiguous and difficult it could not be incorporated in it definitely content without clarification of the doctrine and constitutional practice term " stewardship ", which for brevity not need to be repetition . And not in last place in grammatical plan addendum " stewardship " explains predicate " organized ", which means someone or something in the range of verb action .

Moreover the results of such an interpretation already are there . Witnesses are on trial for assault in the framework of herself judicial system on the occasion of the management of the Judicial Office in Sofia . And this is so , because the organization of management not been committed by constitutionally the empowered body - Ministers Council , which as mentioned already interpretation of 1995 did not have able to do anything without the consent of the bodies of judicial power . Obviously it is , however , that in the framework of the third power such consent not be required .

 
JUDGMENT № 12
Sofia, 21 November 2002
constitutional case № 16/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Zhivan Belchev
( Promulgated, SG No. 112 of 29 November 2002)

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev - Rapporteur, Penka Tomcheva

The Constitutional Court was seised with a request of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of 8 decisions of the National Assembly, adopted at the sitting of 14 March 2002 (promulgated, SG No. 30 of 22 March 2002), by which they are dismissed as members of parliamentary committees in the XXXIX National Assembly: from the members of the Committee on Education and Science Elka Panchova Anastasova and Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska; from the composition of the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry Nadka Radeva Pangarova; from the composition of the Commission for Local Self-Government, Regional Policy and Public Works Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov; Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska from the European Integration Commission; from the composition of the Media Commission Elka Panchova Anastasova; from the composition of the Commission for Complaints and Petitions of the Citizens Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova; from the members of the Committee on Culture Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova and from the members of the Committee on Health Nadka Radeva Pangarova.

The applicants maintain that the decisions contradict the provisions of Article 67, paragraphs 1 and 2 and Article 84 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

By a ruling of 12 September 2002 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits and it constituted as interested parties in the case: the National Assembly, Elka Panchova Anastasova, Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska, Nadka Radeva Pangarova, Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov and Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova .

In pursuance of the opportunity provided to them by the Constitutional Court, all interested parties in the case have filed observations on the request.

The National Assembly, through the Committee on Legal Affairs, states that the request of the Members of Parliament is unfounded, as the constitutional regime of the parliamentary committees is regulated in Articles 73, 79, 80 and 83 of the Constitution and no sign of equality between participation can be placed. in the work of the National Assembly in the capacity of Member of Parliament and membership in a parliamentary committee.

The National Assembly elects permanent and temporary committees from among its members, but the decision to elect members of these committees is framed by the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly (PODNS), which is binding on all MPs.

The decisions do not contradict the provisions of Art. 67, para 1 and 2 and Art. 84 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The claim of the petitioners that the decisions releasing the five MPs from membership in the mentioned parliamentary committees violates their “free mandate” (Art. 67, para. 1 of the Constitution) is unfounded, as there is no obligation in the Constitution to The National Assembly shall elect the Member of Parliament as a member of a standing or temporary committee. The provision of Article 67, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is irrelevant to the present dispute.

With regard to the allegation that the procedural decisions violate the provision of Article 84 of the Constitution, the same is untenable. There is no obstacle for the Members of Parliament released from membership in the standing committees to participate both in the work of the National Assembly and in the work of these committees.

MPs Elka Panchova Anastasova, Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska, Nadka Radeva Pangarova, Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov and Stella Dimitrova Angelova-Bankova have submitted written statements requesting that the 8 decisions of the National Assembly, by which they were released as members of the mentioned parliamentary committees, be repealed as unconstitutional.

Their opinions are reduced to stating considerations that the procedural decisions do not comply with the principles of the Constitution and the requirements of Article 20 of the PODNS. They restrict their rights as MPs in the legislative process. The non-admission of MPs to the standing committees due to the fact that they have left the respective parliamentary group has no legal or constitutional grounds and is essentially an act of political repression. The Member of the National Assembly has a free deputy mandate and once he has received the status of a deputy, he enjoys all the opportunities provided by the free mandate. Procedural decisions restrict the rights of independent MPs.

All five MPs agree with the motives and arguments contained in the request.

The Constitutional Court discussed the arguments and opinions of the interested parties set out in the request and, in order to rule, took into account the following:

1. Pursuant to the provision of Article 73 of the Constitution, the organization and activity of the National Assembly shall be carried out on the basis of the Constitution and the PODNS. This text of the Constitution outlines the normative framework in which the National Assembly is constituted and functions.

In carrying out its activities, the National Assembly is assisted by parliamentary committees, which may be permanent or temporary. The commissions have the character of auxiliary bodies of the people's representation - art. 79, para 2 of the Constitution.

The Constitutional Legislator has provided that these commissions are elected by the National Assembly - Article 79, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

The literal interpretation of this constitutional norm shows that the power enshrined in it, as far as the election of standing and temporary committees as auxiliary bodies of the National Assembly is concerned, is imposed solely on the National Assembly. This constitutional power of the National Assembly finds both its logical development and a normative basic one in Chapter Five of the PODNS.

The National Assembly elects the members of the procedural commissions from among its members, ie. the members of these committees are elected by all 240 MPs. Or the National Assembly has the obligation to elect the members of these committees from the entire composition, and not to elect all the MPs as members of these committees.

The election of the members of the standing and temporary committees is carried out by the National Assembly, and the order and conditions of this election are determined by the National Assembly itself through the regulations adopted by it, which has the force of a normative act.

The subject of the request is to establish the unconstitutionality of specific decisions of the National Assembly, and not of norms from the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly.

The claim of the petitioners that the constitutional principle for the so-called "free mandate" of each Member of Parliament, raised in Article 67, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, determines his possibility for mandatory membership in a permanent or temporary commission is constitutionally unfounded.

This is because the participation of an MP in the work of the National Assembly cannot be identified with his participation in a standing or temporary committee. As mentioned above, the procedural commissions are auxiliary bodies of the people's representation. They do not replace the National Assembly, but only support its activities by preparing draft laws, decisions, declarations and addresses.

The constitutional regime of the parliamentary committees is regulated in Articles 79, 80 and 83 of the Constitution. The constitutional texts reach the election of members in the permanent and temporary commissions, as well as with regard to the type, number and composition of these commissions find legal development in the norms of PODNS.

The provision of Article 19, paragraph 1 of the PODNS provides for the quota principle as a basic principle for the constitution of the standing committees.

The claim of the applicants that linking the participation or non-participation in the composition of the parliamentary committees with the participation or non-participation in a parliamentary group is unconstitutional, as the Constitution does not regulate the term “parliamentary group” is untenable. The lack of constitutional regulation of this type of relations does not make them unconstitutional. If there is any relationship between participation or non-participation in a parliamentary group and participation or non-participation in a parliamentary committee, it applies only to the leadership of the parliamentary committee, as leaving or expelling a Member of Parliament leads to his / her mandatory dismissal. standing committee - art. 15, para 4 PODNS.

The members of the standing committees are elected on the proposal of the parliamentary groups or of a Member of Parliament - Article 19, paragraph 3 of the PODNS, but the final decision is taken by the National Assembly. In this case, there is no relationship between participation or non-participation in a parliamentary group and participation or non-participation in a parliamentary committee. However, there is no constitutional norm by virtue of which it should be imposed on the National Assembly to oblige every Member of Parliament to be elected a member of a standing or temporary committee.

2. As to the allegations of the applicants that the procedural decisions of the National Assembly contradict the provisions of Art. 67, para 2 and Art. 84 of the Constitution, the same are insolvent.

According to the provision of Article 67, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the Members of Parliament act on the basis of the Constitution and the laws of the country, as well as in accordance with their conscience and convictions, while the provision of Article 84 of the Constitution refers to the specific competencies of the National Assembly. .

The free mandate of the MPs does not mean an unlimited mandate, because according to the provision of art. 67, para 2 of the Constitution the MPs act on the basis of the Constitution and the laws in the country, ie. their freedom of action is limited within the framework of the Constitution and the laws of the country. In the specific case only the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly adopted by the National Assembly determine the normative conditions and the order under which the Members of Parliament may participate as members of the parliamentary committees.

The arguments put forward in the request that no Member of Parliament, whether party-colored or independent, can and should be deprived, despite his or her will, of participating in the work of parliamentary committees, let alone leaving one or another parliamentary group. find support in the objective content of the norm of art. 67, para 2 of the Constitution. It is unlikely that the dismissal of a Member of Parliament from membership in a parliamentary committee will restrict his freedom of action and put him in a situation where he cannot act in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the country. The allegations set out in this direction are legally and logically unfounded, as there is obviously no connection between these allegations and the provision of Article 67, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The Members of Parliament released from membership in the standing committees shall in no case be deprived of the right and the actual opportunity to exercise their full powers as deputies.

On the one hand, the five Members of Parliament, together with all other Members of Parliament, participate directly in the work of the National Assembly in the exercise of the competences of the National Assembly referred to in Article 84 of the Constitution. On the other hand, although they are exempted from membership in the procedural commissions, they can participate in all their sittings and take direct part in discussing draft laws or other acts of the National Assembly before submitting them for consideration in the National Assembly (Art. 25, para 6 PODNS), even if some of the sessions are closed (art. 25, para 5 PODNS). Indeed, they cannot vote in committee decisions, but they can do so in plenary if they consider that their views have not been adopted by the committee. The dismissal of the five Members of Parliament from membership in the procedural parliamentary committees does not limit their participation in the direct exercise of the competencies of the National Assembly.

It follows from the foregoing that the request is unfounded and should be rejected.

On the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the decisions of the National Assembly adopted at the sitting of 14 March 2002 on the dismissal of the members of the committees: Education and Science of Elka Panchova Anastasova and Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska; on agriculture and forests of Nadka Radeva Pangarova; in local self-government, regional policy and public works of Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov; on European integration of Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska; in the media of Elka Panchova Anastasova; on the complaints and petitions of the citizens of Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova; in the culture of Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova and in the health care of Nadka Radeva Pangarova. (Promulgated, SG No. 30 of March 22, 2002)

 
Special opinion of judges Todor Todorov, Rumen Yankov and Penka Tomcheva

The relationship between the judiciary and other authorities must be assessed on the basis of several factors:

a) Independence in decision making. Legislatively, when creating a constitution or law, the relevant authority may be independent of the others and yet not be able to perform its functions independently if the final decision depends on conditions related to the other authorities to such an extent that in fact a restrictive balance not to get.

b) Organizational independence, including mainly on personnel issues.

c) Compliance with the principle of separation of powers, the purpose of each of them is to function in a certain area in the constitutional mandatory interaction in the exercise of state power - Article 1, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. By the way, the term "separation of powers" in itself creates resistance, because on such a basis hardly any state system could function. On the other hand, it is well known that in a certain area, if any authority is allowed to act uncontrollably, it will become a source of despotism. The master's degree is no exception. Here the danger is heightened, as historically the judiciary has been less dependent on other authorities for law enforcement and is virtually beyond civil control. Socially and psychologically, "the power of judges is tolerable only because of the possibility of appeal." In this situation, there is a great danger of forming an isolated government, which, under claims of independence, opposes any change, demand for responsibility and transparency.

d) In methodological terms, it should be explicitly noted that the issues not settled by the Constitution are left to the discretion of the National Assembly. Where the Constitution does not introduce explicit prohibitions, the legislator is free, within the framework of the general constitutional principles, to regulate the respective matter by legislative order. This is especially true for the so-called. organizational laws regulating the organization and functioning of the state apparatus, including in the sphere of the judiciary (Article 133 of the Constitution).

We believe that the assessment of constitutionality should be made from those starting points, which are not taken into account in the decision.

1. Under paragraph 1, item 2, which amends Art. 20, para 3 JSA

The provision is a reminiscence of the decision of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 10/99, which recognized the election of two members of the SJC as illegitimate. Then the personnel activity of the council for a period of two years ago was questioned.

On the occasion of the composition of the SJC with a decision under c.d. № 9/94 it was accepted that Article 133 of the Constitution refers to the law on the regulation of the organization of the SJC. In this regard, the Constitutional Court has adopted the thesis that the requirements for the election of members of the council are included in its organization. The SJC is a collective body of the judiciary. The election and dismissal of members of the council are an element of its organization, as stated in the decision, and this must be done by law.

Here the legislator has applied the rule that no one can be a judge for himself ( nemo judex in sua causa ). The rule is, in essence, a reasonable and proportionate restriction on the right to vote in order to exclude possible interest. In this direction are also the provisions of art. 25, para 2 of ZKS and art. 31 of JSA.  

Therefore, the disputed provision is not unconstitutional.

2. Under § 3, item 1, letter “a”, which amends Art. 27, para 1, item 3 JSA regarding the expression “bailiffs, entry judges and court employees”

The newly created text takes into account the specifics of these positions and their inseparable connection with the judiciary.

As an example, it can be pointed out that where there are no appointed bailiffs, their position is performed by the district judge - Article 142, paragraph 2 of the JSA. The funds for their remuneration are included in the budget of the judiciary, which in turn is determined by the annual Budget Law. The provision aims to achieve a balance between the number of magistrates and the persons who carry out activities in direct connection with the magistracy and nothing more. Otherwise, the law states that the Minister of Justice appoints the executive judges - Article 150, paragraph 2 and the entry judges - Article 160, and the respective head of the judiciary - the court employees.

It is not unconstitutional for the SJC, as the primary administrator of the budget, to determine the number of executive judges, registry judges and administrative employees, after determining the amount of their remuneration.

3. Under § 3, item 1, letter “b”, which supplements Art. 27, para 1, item 6 of the JSA - 1/5 of the members of the SJC to request the lifting of the immunity and for temporary removal from position of judge, prosecutor and investigator in the manner prescribed by law. 

The declaration of the provision as unconstitutional in the decision is based on Article 127, item 1 of the Constitution, according to which only the prosecution has an accusatory function.

Immunity is established in the public interest. Removing it is not part of the prosecution, but a condition that makes it possible. It is a prerequisite for criminal proceedings and is not its beginning. That is why it is removed by bodies that are not provided for in the criminal procedure - the National Assembly, the Constitutional Court, the SJC. More on c.d. № 13/92 it was accepted that in the Constitution there is a difference between immunity and the beginning of criminal proceedings.

There is no position in the system of government and administration to which immunity cannot be waived. The formal reading of the Constitution, without distinguishing between immunity and criminal responsibility, leads to the logical and constitutional absurdity that the Grand National Assembly within the state has appointed a person to whom it has granted the right to hold anyone accountable without rules. for herself in this direction. In the rule of law, in its relationship with persons representing state power, no distinction can be made. According to the basic principles of the Constitution - Article 6, paragraph 2, all citizens are equal before the law, and in addition, according to Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law.

By the way, the Constitution itself with Article 132, paragraph 2 does not make a difference in the hierarchy in lifting the immunity of a judge, prosecutor or investigator from the SJC. This provision of Article 27, paragraph 1 ultimately synchronizes the hypothesis of Article 29, paragraph 1, item 4 of the JSA, according to which there is a possibility for the heads of the three units of the judiciary to be released upon entry into force of a sentence. for a crime of a general nature.

4. Paragraph 3, item 1, item “d”, by which item 10, art. 27 JSA has been created in the part regarding the expression “summarized by the Minister of Justice”

The summarization of the case law by the Minister on the basis of the reports of the heads of the three units of the judiciary is an ex post facto activity. This activity cannot affect the activity of the judiciary, ie. of their independence.

The Constitution explicitly creates opportunities for mutual control and ensuring balance in the functioning of the three authorities.

The request from the judiciary to be declared an unconstitutional law, the findings of an existing danger of a crime, the annulment of a ministerial decree are examples in this regard. And no one in these cases claims that the prestige and independence of the legislature or the executive are affected.

The prestige of a judiciary cannot be built on the prohibition on informing other authorities and the public about its activities.

5. Paragraph 3, item 1, b. "D" in the part in which a new item 14 of art. 27, para 1 of JSA is created

It is said that the SJC must approve the rules for professional ethics of professional organizations of judicial officers.

There is no need to justify the nature of the rules of professional ethics. The presence and need for them are imposed by practice. That is why the moral criteria have to be determined by individual professional classes, whose limited circle of members excludes the application of normative acts with a wide range of addressees.

Ultimately, a code of ethics is necessary because moral categories are constantly changing and therefore not subject to legal regulation. This is the reason why the drafting of codes of ethics is generally left to professional organizations. Insofar as the SJC, as the supreme administrative body of the judiciary, represents all its units, it is logical and expedient for its act to establish codes of ethics.

The Constitution does not prohibit such regulation.

6. Paragraph 4, item 1, which amends Article 28 of the JSA

It is about the plenums of the Supreme Courts, the Prosecutor General's Office and the general assemblies of judges, prosecutors and investigators to nominate their administrative heads by secret ballot, which proposal should be sent to the SJC.

Article 133 of the Constitution explicitly provides for the possibility to regulate by law the rules for the work of the SJC. In particular, the law now for the first time regulates the rules for administrative heads to be nominated at general meetings of magistrates. Since the personnel powers of the heads of the units are not specified in the Constitution, but by law, on what grounds should the magistrates be denied the right by secret ballot to elect heads to propose to the SJC for election along with the reserved independent power of the heads of units and the Minister of Justice.

But it should be emphasized here that the new rules have a direct bearing on the independence of magistrates. The combination of administrative and instance control is detrimental to the master's degree. There is a danger that the sole leader will advance politically pleasing and legally obedient magistrates from lower instances. What independent decisions can be expected from a magistrate, whose career and hence remuneration depends solely on the administrative head.

7. Paragraph 6 in the part of Art. 30, para.

First of all, it should be noted that what is said under item 2 of this dissenting opinion applies to the powers of the SJC regarding the determination of the number of bailiffs, registry judges and court employees.

There is nothing unconstitutional in the fact that the proposals under Art. 30, para 1 JSA should be made through the Minister of Justice, who by law is obliged to send them to the SJC within 7 days.

As can be seen, the provision obliges the Minister of Justice to carry out the action prescribed by him within a period determined by law. This excludes the possibility for him to exercise any discretion and to influence the independence of the SJC. It is not necessary to further clarify that the activity related to the organization of the meetings of the SJC is not a power - a term that every lawyer associates with a decisive function.

But something else is important here. Whether the balance between the authorities is disturbed must be judged from the content of the whole law. Thus, Article 26, paragraph 7 of the JSA provides for the possibility of changes in the agenda of the meeting by each member of the SJC, regardless of the disputed authority of the Minister.

8. Paragraph 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 1, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “based on a proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meetings of the prosecutors of the respective prosecutor's offices”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 7, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 9, b. “A” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general assembly of the district court”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 10, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meeting of the investigators from the district investigation services”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 2 JSA regarding participation of magistrates from the units of the judiciary, whose composition is less than 5 people, to participate with the right to vote from the general assemblies of the higher bodies of the judiciary; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 3 JSA , determining the manner of taking decisions by the general assemblies of the magistrates; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 4 JSA , obliging the respective head to submit the proposal of the general assembly to the SJC through the Minister of Justice; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 5 JSA regarding the words “of the general meeting and”.                 

The issues under the paragraphs listed in item 8 are general and what has been said about the admissibility from the constitutional point of view of the magistrates to make proposals for the election of their leaders by the SJC will apply to it.

9. Paragraph 6 in the part of art. 30, para 8 JSA

The provision states that in execution of the personnel decisions of the SJC under Art. 27, para 1, item 4 orders are issued by the “chairperson of the SJC”.

First of all, it should be noted that the "chairman" in this case should mean not only the Minister of Justice, but also the other three heads of the judiciary.

Secondly, that who presides is obliged to issue an order. He has no discretion and cannot sign any act other than that of the SJC. We consider it excessive to assume that after the decision of the SJC to appoint a senior magistrate, to sign an order by the one who chairs the meeting, the principle of separation of powers is violated. For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that even under the current regime, which is preserved by repealing the norm, orders are issued by the Minister of Justice under item 1, b. "B", items 6 and 7 of art. 30, para 4 in its wording from 1998.

10. Paragraph 9 in the part of art. 35a, para 1 JSA

The provision stipulates that the Minister of Justice, on the basis of annual reports submitted by the units, shall prepare a summary report on the activities of the judiciary and submit it to the SJC for consideration. This provision is not unconstitutional and the considerations for this are set out in item 4 of this dissenting opinion.

11. Paragraph 9 in the part of art. 35b JSA

The provision before the amendment of the law was the subject of a request to be declared unconstitutional under c.d. № 34/98, which was rejected.

It is necessary to reproduce the decisive paragraph of the reasons: "The inspection of the organization of the formation and movement of judicial, prosecutorial, investigative cases by the Minister cannot be considered as interference of the executive power in the work of the judiciary."

A comparison of Article 35b with the old text shows that the name "Ministry of Justice" has been replaced by "Minister of Justice". In the new para 3 of art. 35b it is provided for a judge, prosecutor and investigator to participate in the joint inspections together with representatives of the inspectorate. Without new circumstances or arguments, the Constitutional Court should not deviate from the cited decision.

In this particular case, it should be noted that the Constitution does not exclude the right of the legislator to provide for the possibility of extending the inspections related only to the organization of judicial activity to the Supreme Courts and the Prosecutor General's Office.

12. Paragraph 9 in the part of art. 35e JSA

Judicial experts are not magistrates. Their conclusions are not judicial acts and are not binding on the courts and prosecutors' offices.

From this point of view, the broad interpretation of Article 133 of the Constitution, according to which the organization and activity of courts, prosecutors and investigative bodies must be regulated by law, is exaggerated. Even if it is assumed that the activity of forensic experts can be regulated by law, this does not exclude the general rule according to which the legislator may delegate this regulation to the Council of Ministers. In fact, such a legal delegation is contained in the contested provision.

13. Paragraph 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 1 JSA regarding the words “bailiffs and entry judges”

It is said that the general assembly of the district court consists of all judges and entry judges.

The provision is not unconstitutional.

Judicial enforcement achieves the ultimate goal of exercising citizens' rights. The connection between the claim process and the enforcement process is obvious. In the instance plan, the actions of the bailiffs are controlled by the district judges. In terms of budget, their payment is provided by the budget of the district court.

14. Paragraph 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 2, item 1 JSA

The provision concerns the general assembly of the district court, which consists of all judges, bailiffs and entry judges.

For the reasons stated above, this composition of the general assembly of the district court is not unconstitutional.

It should be borne in mind that the power of a general assembly to nominate a chairman of the court provided for in Article 56a, paragraph 2, item 1 of the JSA would be unconstitutional if the bailiffs and the entry judges participate in it. However, this unconstitutionality cannot be extended to the other powers regulated in this paragraph, due to which the decision of the court in this part is incorrect.

15. Paragraph 13, which amends and supplements Article 59 of the JSA

It is about the new para 3, item 1 - the general assembly of the district court to appoint a person, who proposes for chairman, and para 4, which determines the quorum of the general assembly for taking this decision; § 14, item 2 in the part of art. 63, para 1, item 3, letter “b”, obliging the chairman of the district court to send a reference according to a sample prepared by the SJC to the Minister to submit it to the SJC ; § 15, which amends Art. 62, para 2 JSA , the content of which is in the sense that the General Assembly of the military court exercises the powers under Art. 59, para 3, items 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6. ; § 16, which amends and supplements Article 76 of the JSA . It is about the activity of an appellate court. The General Assembly to exercise the powers under Art. 59, para 3, items 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6, of which item 1 refers to a decision of the General Assembly to propose a chairman of the court; § 17, item 2 in the part of art. 79, para 1, item 2, letters “a” and “b” JSA regarding the words “ of the Minister of Justice” and letter “b” regarding the annual report on the activity of the court and sending inquiries and statistics to the Minister of Justice for consideration by the SJC; § 23, which with Art. 100, para 1 JSA creates a new item 6, regarding the words “Minister of Justice” . This refers to the report of the SAC, which is sent to the Minister of Justice for inclusion in the report under Article 27, paragraph 1, item 10 (annual report of the courts by the Minister of Justice); § 27, which amends Article 114, paragraph 6 of the JSA , regarding the words “Minister of Justice” . This is an obligation of the Prosecutor General to send the annual report to the Minister of Justice for inclusion in the summary report under Article 27, paragraph 1, item 10. In all the above cases, the legislator is constitutionally authorized to create a legal framework for the organization of the activity of the judiciary. The same arguments as set out above regarding the powers of general meetings of magistrates and the summarizing of reports and the preparation of statistical reports apply here.                  

16. Paragraphs 35 and 36, which amend Art. 125 and create Art. 125a JSA

Distinguishing magistrate positions in the judiciary from the capacity of administrative head is not unconstitutional.

The positions in the judiciary listed in the Constitution are judge, prosecutor, investigator, chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation, chairman of the Supreme Administrative Court and chief prosecutor. Positions such as chairman of a district, district or appellate court, district, district or appellate prosecutor, director of the NSS and director of a district investigation service, as well as the positions of their deputies are not specified in the Constitution and are established by law. The comparison of para 2 and para 3 of art. 129 gives grounds to conclude that the Constitution distinguishes between a magistrate position and a position of administrative head, although only for the chairmen of the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court and the Prosecutor General. The mandate relates only to the capacity of administrative head, but not to the capacity of magistrate. According to the Constitution, there is no obstacle in the JSA to differentiate the position of the magistrate from the capacity of administrative head. The irremovability of the magistrate under Art. 129, para 3 shall not include irremovability of the managerial position held by him. It is intended to safeguard the independence of his business, not to preserve his leadership. When a court president loses this capacity, he continues to be a judge, and that is crucial. The constitution defends the status of a judge, not a leader. And it is inadmissible to believe that she is defending the managerial quality that has been acquired.

The mandate under the Constitution, provided for the heads of the units, may be changed by law. There is no constitutional obstacle to the introduction by law of a mandate for positions not provided for in the Constitution. In Decision № 33/98, the Constitutional Court concluded that there was no constitutional provision that would exclude the possibility of a mandate for bodies other than those specified in the Constitution. If there is no ban, there can be no talk of violating it. This means that in other cases the National Assembly can provide a mandate by law.

From this point of view, it cannot be assumed that the amendments violate Article 129, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The law does not affect the magistrates in this capacity and does not dismiss them, but only provides for general meetings under Article 30, paragraph 1, followed by the procedure provided by law under Article 30, paragraphs 2-8 JSA.
Administrative heads have a mandate, as their functions and powers as heads are not part of the judiciary. They have nothing to do with the independence of the judiciary and their irremovability as magistrates.

The reference to Decision № 9/94 of the Constitutional Court is unconvincing. The findings in the reasons for the decision do not exclude another decision, which is also constitutional.

17. Paragraph 40 in the part of art. 129, para 1 JSA regarding the words “initially”

The text is not unconstitutional, as it guarantees the rights of magistrates and does not affect them.

The status of irremovability is acquired after the expiration of 3 years from the appointment of the first magistrate position, regardless of which unit of the judiciary it has been performed. In all subsequent appointments, the magistrate will not be considered to have been initially appointed and no new three-year internship will be required to acquire permanent status. By including the word "initially", it is clarified that the irremovability of the magistrate is not lost when he moves to another position, for example by a judge as a prosecutor or investigator.

The impugned provision equalizes the status of all magistrates (a judge who has served on the spot for three years and joined the prosecutor's office will be irremovable; a contrary interpretation would mean for the incoming judge to start a new term for irremovability).

18. Paragraph 45, item 1, which amends Art. 134, para 3 JSA, in the part regarding the words “not less than 1/5 of the members of the SJC”

With regard to this amendment to the law, which is not unconstitutional, what has been said in item 3 regarding the addition of Article 27, paragraph 1, item 6 of the JSA must be taken into account.

19. Paragraph 45, item 2, which creates para 4 in art. 134 JSA

The provision is not unconstitutional and the motives to item 3 of the opinion up to art. 27, para 1, item 6 are relevant for it.

20. Paragraph 54, which amends Article 143 JSA

The ranks of magistrates are not regulated at the constitutional level and it is a matter of judgment to change the existing regulation of ranks, rename them and remove them.

21. Paragraph 74, which amends Article 168, paragraph 1, item 3 of the JSA

The provision provides for cases in which magistrates are liable if they violate the rules of professional ethics. Since the provision of Art. 27, para 1, item 13 has not been repealed, there is no reason to repeal this text as well.

22. Paragraph 85, which creates a new para 3 of art. 190 JSA

The persons who give permission for leave to the heads under Art. 125a shall notify the chairperson of the SJC thereof.

A constitutional rule concerning the principle of separation of powers has not been violated. The norm is of an organizational nature. The notification shall not give rise to any rights or obligations for the magistrates and shall not affect the independence of the judiciary.

 
JUDGMENT № 13
Sofia, 16 December 2002
constitutional case № 17/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Georgi Markov
( Promulgated, SG No. 118 of 20 December 2002)

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov - Rapporteur, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on 17.09.2002 at the request of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of Cassation to establish the unconstitutionality of a number of provisions of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Judiciary Act (SDAA) - SG, issue 74/2002, namely :

- § 1, item 2, which amends para 3 of art. 20 of the Judiciary Act (JSA);

- § 3, v.1, b. "A", which amends Article 27, paragraph 1, item 3 of the JSA, regarding the expression "bailiffs, registry judges and court employees";

- § 3, v.1, b. "B", which supplements Article 27, paragraph 1, item 6 of the JSA;

-§ 3, v.1, b. “D” in the part creating a new item 10 in Art. 27, para 1 JSA, regarding the expression “summarized by the Minister of Justice on the basis of the annual reports and statistical data sent by the courts, prosecutor's offices and investigative services”;

- § 3, v.1, b. "D" in the part which creates a new item 11 in art. 27, para 1 JSA;

- § 3, v.1, b. "D" in the part with which a new item 13 is created in art. 27, para 1 JSA;

- § 3, v.1, b. "D" in the part with which a new item 14 is created in art. 27, para 1 JSA;

- § 4, item 1, which amends Art. 28, para 1 JSA;

- § 6, which amends Article 30 JSA;

- § 8, which amends Article 34, paragraph 1 of the JSA;

- § 9, which amends Chapter Three of the JSA;

- § 12, which creates a new Article 56a in the JSA;

- § 13, which amends and supplements Article 59 of the JSA;

- § 14, item 2 in the part of art. 63, para 1, item 3, b. "B" JSA;

- § 15, which amends Article 69, paragraph 2 of the JSA;

- § 16, which amends and supplements Article 76 of the JSA;

- § 17, item 2, which amends Art. 79, para 1, item 2 JSA, regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”, referred to in b. "A" and "b" of the provision;

- § 23, which creates item 6 in art. 100, para 1 JSA regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 27, which amends Article 114, paragraph 6 of the JSA regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 35, which amends Article 125 JSA;

- § 36, which creates a new Article 125a in the JSA;

- § 37, item 2, which creates a new para 2 in art. 126 JSA;

- § 40 in the part amending Art. 129, para 1 JSA regarding the expression “initially appointed in the judiciary judges, prosecutors and investigators become irremovable after reaching 3 years of service in the respective position”;

- § 40 in the part of art. 129, para 4 JSA;

- § 43, which creates a new Article 131a JSA;

- § 45, item 1, which amends Article 134, paragraph 3 of the JSA regarding the expression “by not less than one fifth of the members of the Supreme Judicial Council”;

- § 45, item 2, which creates a new para 4 in art. 134 JSA;

- § 49, item 2, which creates a new para 2 in art. 139b JSA;

- § 54, which amends Article 143 of the JSA;

- § 55, which amends Article 144 JSA;

- § 59, which creates art. 148a JSA;

- § 69, which amends Article 163 JSA;

- § 74, which amends Article 168, paragraph 1, item 3 of the JSA;

- § 85, item 3, which creates a new para 3 in art. 190 JSA.

The applicants consider that the principles of the rule of law and the separation of powers - Article 4, paragraph 1 and Article 8 of the Constitution, as well as the autonomy and independence of the judiciary - Article 117, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law have been substantially violated. . They maintain that the eventual declaration of unconstitutionality of the above-mentioned provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities deprives the law of internal logic and consistency and asks in this case the Constitutional Court to declare it completely unconstitutional.

By a ruling of 29 October 2002, the request was admitted for examination on the merits, with the exception of § 49 of the Act.

With the same definition as interested parties in the case are constituted: the National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice, the Supreme Judicial Council, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General, the National Investigation Service, the Sofia Court of Appeal, the Plovdiv Court of Appeal Court of Appeal, Varna Court of Appeal, Veliko Tarnovo Court of Appeal, Military Court of Appeal, Sofia Appellate Prosecutor's Office, Plovdiv Appellate Prosecutor's Office, Burgas Appellate Prosecutor's Office, Varna Appellate Prosecutor's Office, Veliko Tarnovo Appellate Prosecutor's Office, Military Prosecutor's Office , The Association of Prosecutors in Bulgaria and the Chamber of Investigators in Bulgaria.

In support of the request, the General Prosecutor, the Sofia Court of Appeal, the Plovdiv Court of Appeal, the Varna Court of Appeal, the Burgas Court of Appeal, the Veliko Tarnovo Court of Appeal, the Military Court of Appeal, the Sofia Court of Appeal, the Plovdiv Court of Appeal and the Plovdiv Court of Appeal , The Military Appellate Prosecutor's Office, the Union of Judges in Bulgaria and the Association of Prosecutors in Bulgaria.

Arguments for rejecting the request were presented by the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Justice.

The other parties did not submit comments.

The Constitutional Court, after considering the considerations developed in the request, the views of the parties and the evidence attached to the case, held the following:

I. On increasing the powers of the executive

 

A number of the challenged provisions of the Act on the Protection of the Judiciary extend the powers of the executive branch to the judiciary, namely:

- § 3, v.1, b. “D” in the part, which creates a new item 10 in art. 27, para 1 JSA, enables the Minister of Justice to summarize an annual report on the activity of the courts, prosecutor's offices and investigative services;

- § 6, which amends Art. 30, para 1 JSA, provides for the proposals for determining the number of judges, prosecutors and investigators, as well as for their appointment, promotion, demotion, transfer and dismissal to be made until The Supreme Judicial Council (SJC) through the Minister of Justice;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 4 JSA obliges the heads of the magistracy to submit the personnel proposals of the general assemblies to the SJC through the Minister of Justice;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 8 JSA authorizes the Minister of Justice as chairman of the SJC to issue orders with which to appoint, reduce, transfer and dismiss absolutely all judges, prosecutors and investigators. (Until this legislative change, the powers of the Minister of Justice in this regard extended only to the level of appellate judges and did not cover the prosecution and the investigation.);

- § 9 in the part of art. 35a, para 1 JSA envisages the Minister of Justice to prepare a summary report on the activity of the bodies of the judiciary and to submit it for consideration in the SJC;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35a, para 2 JSA authorizes the Minister of Justice to submit annually to the National Assembly a summary report on the activity of the bodies of the judiciary;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35b enables the inspectorate at the Ministry of Justice to check the organization of the administrative activity of the courts, the prosecutor's offices and the investigative services, as well as the movement and the closing of their cases. The Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General, the Supreme Cassation Prosecutor's Office and the Supreme Administrative Prosecutor's Office are no longer excluded from these inspections;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35d JSA stipulates that the management and storage of the personnel files of judges, prosecutors and investigators shall be carried out by the Minister of Justice;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35e JSA envisages not a law but an act of the Council of Ministers to regulate the organization of the forensic examinations and the activity of the forensic experts;

- with § 9 in the part of art. 35f, para 2, 6 and 7 JSA the National Institute of Justice is appointed to the Minister of Justice. The Minister is assigned to issue regulations for the activities of the institute and to allow specialized non-profit legal entities to improve the qualification of magistrates;

- § 14, item 2 in the part of art. 63, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA obliges the chairman of the district court to send references and statistical data to the Minister of Justice for consideration by the SJC;

- § 17, item 2 in the part of art. 79, para 1, item 2, b. "A" and "b" JSA provides for the annual reports on the activities of the appellate, district and regional courts, as well as the relevant reports and statistics to be sent to the Minister of Justice for consideration by the SJC;

- § 23, which in item 100, para 1 JSA creates item 6, obliges the Supreme Administrative Court to send to the Minister of Justice the annual report on its activity;

- § 27, which amends Article 114, paragraph 6 of the JSA, obliges the Prosecutor General to prepare an annual report on the activities of the prosecution and to send it to the Minister of Justice for inclusion in the annual report under Article 27, paragraph 1, item 10 JSA;

- § 69 of the Law on Judicial Education, which amends Art. ;

- § 85, which creates a new para 3 in art. 190 JSA, provides for the permits for leave of the managers under art. 125a JSA to be communicated to the Minister of Justice.

It should be borne in mind that Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law with a division of powers into legislative, executive and judicial - Article 8 of the Basic Law, in which the administration of justice is an independent state function. The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria contains an independent Chapter Six, entitled "Judiciary", which constitutionally recognizes and legitimizes the "third power".

By the will of the constitutional legislator, the judiciary is the most independent and autonomous - Article 117, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law. The Supreme Supervision for accurate and uniform application of the laws by the courts is carried out only by the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court - Art. 124 and Art. 125, para 1 of the Constitution.

The three authorities must cooperate. The legislator is obliged to provide mechanisms for balancing the relations between them, and not to allow the executive power to interfere in the exercise of judicial functions.

It is no coincidence that, by the will of the constitutional legislator, the Minister of Justice is not the chairman, but only the chairman of the SJC sessions, and without the right to vote. (Almost until the last moment of adoption of Article 130, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law, the deputies of the Grand National Assembly had the attitude that the chairman of the SJC should be the President of the Republic as a greater guarantee for the independence of the judiciary.);

With Decision № 1/1999 on c.d. № 34/1998 The Constitutional Court recognized the right of the Minister of Justice, as chairman of the SJC, to make staff proposals to this body.

However, with the above-mentioned provisions of the Law on the Judiciary, the powers of the executive branch in relation to the judiciary are excessively increased, which violates Art. 8, Art. 117, para 2, Art. 124 and Art. law. It is particularly inadmissible from the point of view of the Constitution:

- Proposals of the judiciary, including the presidents of the Supreme Courts and the Prosecutor General, to be made to the SJC obligatorily, solely through the Minister of Justice, who is a representative of the central executive and an important political figure.

This creates conditions for the administration to interfere in the autonomous and independent personnel policy of the judiciary, carried out by its bodies. It is extremely unacceptable from the point of view of the Basic Law that even the highest magistrates cannot submit their proposals directly to the SJC, and this should be done through the mediation of the executive branch;

- the annual reports on the activity of the courts, prosecutor's offices and investigative services to be submitted for consideration to the SJC through the Minister of Justice, who will prepare a summary report on their activity. Courts, prosecutors' offices and investigative services cannot be deprived of the opportunity to submit their annual reports directly to the SJC;

- the Minister of Justice to keep the personnel files of judges, prosecutors and investigators. In view of the division of powers, the personnel files of the personnel of one authority may not be formed and maintained by a representative of another authority;

- the Minister of Justice to issue orders appointing and dismissing absolutely all magistrates, including the Supreme Court judges and prosecutors from the General Prosecutor's Office. This makes it an absolute personnel center of the judiciary. The constitutional principle of independence and autonomy of the judiciary is implemented not only through its constitutional proclamation, but also through appropriate guarantees for non-interference in its work, created by the relevant legal order - Decision № 8/94 under c.d. № 9 of 1994;

- the Minister of Justice to submit annually to the Parliament a report on the activity of the independent judiciary. The Constitution excludes the possibility of an independent judiciary accountable to the legislature. It is even more absurd for this to happen through the executive branch. To the extent that the National Assembly can hear information on the activities of the judiciary, the report on this should be submitted only by representatives of the judiciary;

- the Inspectorate of the Ministry of Justice to inspect the activities of the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court and the Prosecutor General. This is because the Chief Prosecutor under the Constitution supervises the legality and methodological guidance of the activities of all prosecutors - Article 126, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, and the Supreme Courts supervise the accurate and uniform application of laws by the courts - Article 124. and Article 125, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. (The Constitutional Court remains in its opinion expressed in Decision № 1/1999 on Code of Criminal Procedure № 34/98 with regard to the powers of the Inspectorate relating to other bodies of the judiciary.)

- The National Institute of Justice, which provides training for junior judges and prosecutors, as well as the training of all current judges, prosecutors and investigators, should be under the auspices of the executive, not the judiciary. This institute helps the professional training of magistrates, which is why its natural place in view of the basic law is in the judiciary.

- the procedure and conditions for conducting the theoretical and practical examination for legal capacity of lawyers, some of which are submitted to the judiciary, to be determined by the Minister of Justice and not by the National Assembly - Art. 4, para 1, Art. .84, item 1 and art. 133 of the Constitution.

- The Council of Ministers to adopt regulations for the organization of forensic examinations and the activity of forensic experts. The organization of the expertises and the expert activity are inextricably linked with the administration of justice, therefore in view of Article 133 of the Constitution their activity should be regulated by law.

Therefore, the following should be declared unconstitutional:

- § 3 ZIDZSV, item 1, item “d” in the part of art. 27, para 1, item 10 JSA regarding the words “summarized by the Minister of Justice”;

- § 6 of the Judiciary Act in the part of Art. 30, para 1 of the Judicial Act regarding the words “through the Minister of Justice, who within 7 days sends them to the Supreme Judicial Council with an opinion”;

- § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the part of Article 30, paragraph 4 of the JSA regarding the words “through the Minister of Justice”;

- § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the part of Art.

- § 9 of the Act in the part of art. 35a, para 1 of the JSA;

- § 9 of the JSAA in the part of art. 35a, para 2 JSA;

- § 9 of the JSAA in the part of art. 35b JSA;

- § 9 of the JSAA in the part of art.

- § 9 of the JSAA in the part of art.

- § 9 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 35f, para 2 JSA regarding the words “to the Minister of Justice”;

- § 9 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 35f, para 6 JSA regarding the words “the Minister of Justice, coordinated with”;

- § 9 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 35f, para 7 JSA regarding the words “The Minister of Justice in coordination with”;

- § 14, item 2 of the Law on Copyright and Related Rights in the part of art. 63, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 17, item 2 of the Act in the part of art. 79, para. 1, item 2, items “a” and “b” of the JSA, regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 23 of the Law on the Judiciary, which in Article 100, paragraph 1 of the JSA is created item 6, regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 27 of the Law on the Judiciary, which amends Article 114, paragraph 6 of the JSA, regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 69 ZIDZSV, which amends Art. 163 JSA, in the part regarding the words “under conditions and by order, determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Justice” and

- § 85 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which creates a new para 3 in Art.

II. Regarding the personnel powers of the general meetings 

A number of the provisions of the Judiciary Act authorize the general meetings of judges, prosecutors and investigators with important functions in staffing the judiciary. It's about:

- § 4, item 1, which amends art. 28, para 1 JSA. According to this provision, proposals for appointment as chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court may be made by the respective plenums of the two courts, for general prosecutor - the general meetings of the Supreme Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Prosecutor's Office, and for director of the National Investigation Service - the general meeting of investigators. from this service;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 1, b. “B” JSA, according to which a proposal for appointment of the chairmen of the military and appellate courts is made by the general assembly of the respective court;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA, according to which proposals for appointment of the heads of the regional, district, military and appellate prosecutors are made by the general meetings of the respective prosecutor's offices;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 7, b. “B” JSA, according to which the proposals for appointment of the chairmen of the district courts are made by the general assemblies of these courts;

§ 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 9, item “a” JSA, according to which the proposals for appointment of the chairmen of the district courts are made on the basis of the general assembly of the district court;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 10, item “b” JSA, according to which a proposal for appointment of the directors of the district investigation services is made by the general meetings of the investigators from the district investigation services.

In the same sense are § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 2, 3, 4 and 5 JSA; § 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 1 JSA and art. 56a, para 2, item 1 JSA; § 13, which amends and supplements Article 59 of the JSA; § 15, which amends Article 69, paragraph 2 of the JSA; § 16, which amends and supplements Article 76 of the JSA.

It should be borne in mind that by the will of the Grand National Assembly, reflected in the reasons for the adoption of the Constitution, the implementation of personnel policy in the judiciary is entrusted to a constitutionally established special body - the Supreme Judicial Council (Article 129 of the Basic Law).

General meetings of judges, prosecutors and investigators are not constitutionally provided bodies of the judiciary. They can be created, as far as it is necessary for the unification of the practice of application of the laws, raising the qualification of the magistrates, etc. However, they cannot become human resources of the judiciary, which can have a generally destabilizing effect on the activity of the judiciary. (In this sense, the opinion of the Union of Judges in Bulgaria is very definite.)

The constitutional function of judges is not to decide personnel issues, but to protect the rights and legitimate interests of citizens, legal entities and the state, and to administer justice in the name of the people - Article 117, paragraph 1 and Article 118 of the Constitution; of the prosecutors - to monitor the observance of the law - art. 127 of the Basic Law, and of the investigators - to carry out the preliminary proceedings in the criminal cases - art. 128 of the Constitution.

In addition, from the point of view of the Constitution, it is inadmissible for the general assembly of the district court to include bailiffs and registry judges, because they are not magistrates.

Therefore, as contrary to Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 129, para 1 of the Basic Law, the following should be declared unconstitutional:

- § 4, item 1 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which amends Article 28, paragraph 1 of the JSA;

- § 6 of the Law on Judicial Service in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 1, b “b” of the JSA regarding the words “on the basis of a proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”;

- § 6 ZIDZSV the part of art. 30, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meetings of the prosecutors by the respective prosecutor's offices”;

- § 6 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 7, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”;

- § 6 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 9, b. “A” JSA regarding the words “based on a proposal of the general assembly of the district court”;

- § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, in the part of Art.

- § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the part of Art.

- § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the part of Art.

- § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the part of Art.

- § 6 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 30, para. 5 JSA regarding the words “of the general meetings and”;

- § 12 of the Law on Judicial Enforcement Agents in the part of Art. 56a, para 1 of the Judicial Service Act regarding the words “bailiffs and entry judges”;

- § 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 2 item 1 JSA;

- § 13 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which amends and supplements Article 59 of the Law on Judicial Service;

- § 15 of the Act on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which amends Article 69, paragraph 2 of the JSA;

- § 16 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

III. On the immunity and irremovability of magistrates 

With § 3, item 1, item “b” of the Law on the Judicial Service of the Republic of Bulgaria, Article 27, paragraph 1, item 6 of the JSA shall be supplemented, giving the opportunity and at the request of not less than one fifth of the members to waive the immunity of magistrates. In the same sense are § 45, item 1 of the Act, which amends Article 134, paragraph 3 of the JSA and § 45, item 2 of the Act, which establishes paragraph 4 in Article 134 of the JSA.

The Constitutional Court held that the provisions in question contradicted Article 127, item 1 of the Basic Law, according to which only the prosecution has accusatory functions for bringing to justice the persons who have committed a crime. The specified minimum quota of members of the SJC has no constitutional powers to initiate or initiate criminal prosecution, as well as to collect, verify and evaluate data in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In this sense is also Decision № 1/1999 under c.d. № 34/1998 and Decision № 2/1992 on c.d. № 2/92

§ 35 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities amends Art. 125 JSA, and Art. 125a in the JSA, introducing a distinction between the existing positions in the bodies of the judiciary of magistrates and administrative heads. A mandate is introduced for the latter.

According to Article 129, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, judges, prosecutors and investigators become irremovable after completing three years of service in the position they hold. It is unlikely that the constitutional legislator would have used the term "position" if it did not take into account the specific official position of a judge, prosecutor or investigator in the hierarchy of the judiciary.

The Basic Law does not make any division of magistrates into "ordinary" and "managerial". All judges, prosecutors and investigators have a common status with regard to irremovability, which ensures the stability of the judiciary. This constitutional principle precludes the introduction of a mandate for a certain category of magistrates, which would lead to the replacement of judges, prosecutors and investigators from the position they hold (this is practically the case with the above-mentioned provisions). The Constitution allows an exception only in respect of the chairmen of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court and the Prosecutor General - Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law.

It should also be borne in mind that magistrates may not be dismissed directly by the legislator by his act, but only by the body authorized by the Constitution - the SJC, in accordance with the grounds and procedure specified by law. In this sense is also Decision № 9/1994 under c.d. № 11/94

The independence of the judiciary is also guaranteed by the fact that the magistrates are irremovable - Decision № 6/1993 under c.d. № 4/93. Irremovability makes them independent of other state bodies in the exercise of their powers. In determining by virtue of Article 133 of the Constitution the conditions and procedure for appointment and dismissal of judges, prosecutors and investigators, the legislator is obliged to comply with the constitutionally established guarantee of independence, such as the irremovability referred to in Article 129, para 2 of the basic law. In this sense is also Decision № 8/94 under c.d. № 9/94

Therefore, § 35 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and § 36 of the Act

§ 40 of the Law on Judicial Service, which amends Article 129, paragraph 1 of the Judicial Act, provides that judges, prosecutors and investigators initially appointed to the judiciary shall become irremovable after reaching three years of service in the respective position.

According to Article 129, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, judges, prosecutors and investigators become irremovable after completing three years of service in the position they hold, regardless of whether they were initially appointed in the judiciary. That is why the norm of § 40 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which amends Article 129, paragraph 1 of the JSA, should be declared unconstitutional in the part concerning the word “initially”.

§ 43 of the JSAA creates a new Article 131a of the JSA, according to which a permanent judge, prosecutor or investigator may be demoted if he “no longer possesses the necessary qualities to perform his / her professional duties”.

In this case, the basis for disciplinary punishment is a general qualification and assessment, which is made on the basis of the overall work of the respective magistrate. The Constitutional Court with Decision № 1/1999 under c.d. № 34/1998 expressly stated that disciplinary offenses, like crimes and administrative offenses, must have clearly and precisely defined factual elements. Otherwise, disciplinary liability of the magistrates may result in any revocation of a decision on its appeal due to incorrect application of substantive law or for a procedural violation committed during the examination of the case.

Therefore, due to a contradiction with Art. 4, para 1 of the Basic Law, § 43 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities should be declared unconstitutional.

IV. On the ranks of the judiciary

With § 54 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and § 55 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Art. These provisions introduce an entirely new system of ranks in the judiciary depending on the length of service as a judge, prosecutor or investigator.

When the new system of ranks is put into effect, the already acquired rights of the magistrates for their promotion to a rank on the basis of proven good work are affected, which violates Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The status already acquired under the previous legislation is not taken into account, which results in the revocation by law of legal rights already acquired by the magistrates, and ultimately to their actual reduction on the spot. For example, if before the new system of ranks introduced by the amendments to the Law on Judicial Service in question, a judge in the Court of Appeal with 11 years of experience had the opportunity to acquire the rank of chairman of a division in the Supreme Court of Cassation, under the new legislation he could not get it.

The above provisions should therefore be declared unconstitutional.

V. Regarding the activity of the Supreme Judicial Council

Some norms of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities give powers to the SJC, which do not comply with the Basic Law. Thus:

- with § 1, item 2 of the Law on Judicial Service, which amends Art. 20, para 3 of the Judicial Act, a member of the SJC, whose election is disputed, is given the opportunity to participate in the meetings, but without the right to vote.

- с § 3, т.1, б. "A", which amends Article 27, paragraph 1, item 3 of the JSA, provides for the SJC to determine the number of bailiffs, registry judges and court employees. In this sense is also § 6 ZIDZSV in the part of art. 30, para 1 JSA;

- § 3, v.1, b. “D” in the part, which creates a new item 14 in art. 27, para 1 JSA, envisages the SJC to approve rules for professional ethics, adopted by the respective professional organizations of the court employees.

According to Article 129, paragraph 1 of the Basic Law, the SJC has personnel powers only in respect of judges, prosecutors and investigators, and not in respect of bailiffs, registry judges and court employees.

It is unacceptable in view of the principles of the rule of law of a member of the SJC whose election is contested to participate in its meetings and form a quorum, while not having the right to vote. Thus, the powers under the already established and exercising mandate of the SJC are unconstitutionally limited.

In view of the above, the following should be declared unconstitutional:

- § 1, item 2 of the JSAA, which amends Article 20, paragraph 3 of the JSA;

- § 3, item 1, item “a” of the Law on Judicial Enforcement Agents, which amends Art. 27, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “bailiffs, entry judges and court employees”;

- § 3, v.1, b. “D” of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which creates a new item 14 in Article 129, paragraph 1 of the JSA;

- § 6, in the part of art. 30, para 1 JSA, regarding the words “the bailiff, the entry judges and the court employees”.

VI. Regarding other disputed provisions of the Act

In conclusion, the Constitutional Court held that the rest of the impugned provisions were not unconstitutional and that the claim should therefore be rejected.

There are no constitutional obstacles for the SJC to approve rules for professional ethics, adopted by the respective professional organizations of judges, prosecutors and investigators - § 3, item 1, b. “D” of the Judiciary Act in the part by which a new item 13 is created in Art. 27, para 1 of the Judicial System Act This is because judges, prosecutors and investigators are appointed, promoted, demoted, transferred and dismissed - art. 129, para 1 of the Constitution. The rules for professional ethics, in turn, are criteria for the appointment of judges, prosecutors and investigators, and their violation leads to their disciplinary liability - § 37, item 2 of the Law on Judicial Practices, which creates a new paragraph 2 in Article 126 of the Judicial Act and § 74 ZIDZSV, which amends Art. 168, para 1, item 3 JSA.

The same applies to § 40 in the part of Article 129, paragraph 4 of the JSA, which assigns the SJC with an ordinance to determine the procedure for attestation of magistrates.

That is why the above-mentioned provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities are not unconstitutional.

There are no constitutional obstacles in the JSA to include the chapter "Minister of Justice". This is because according to Article 130, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law, the sessions of the SJC are chaired by the Minister of Justice.

There are no grounds for declaring the unconstitutionality of § 6 of the JSAA in the part of Art. 30, para 6 of the JSA. The right of the Minister of Justice to make proposals to the SJC for appointment, promotion, demotion, transfer and dismissal of magistrates was recognized by the Constitutional Court with Decision № 1/1999 under Code of Civil Procedure. № 34/1998 The considerations set out in this decision that there are no violations of the constitutional principle of separation of powers are still relevant today. This also applies to the possibility recognized by the provision in question of the Minister of Justice to give opinions on the proposals to the SJC. Therefore, there are no grounds for a change in the practice of the Constitutional Court.

It is not in violation of the Constitution and the possibility for the Minister of Justice to annually submit to the National Assembly a report on the state, structure and dynamics of crime, the causes and conditions that determine them, as well as the measures taken - § 3 of the Act. 35a, para 3 JSA. It should be borne in mind that the Minister of Justice is a member of the government responsible for the domestic policy of the country - Article 105, paragraph 1 of the Basic Law. Part of this policy is the fight against crime.

The provisions of Chapter Three of the Law on the Judiciary relating to: the activities of the National Institute of Justice (other than those indicated as unconstitutional in Chapter One of this Decision) are not in violation of the Constitution; The unified information system for combating crime; security of court buildings, etc.

There is no constitutional prohibition for the SJC to adopt internal regulations for its activity and for its administration - § 3, item 1, item “d” of the Law on the Judiciary, which in Article 27, paragraph 1 of the JSA creates a new item 11. This is thus, because the organization of the SJC itself is regulated by Chapter Two of the JSA, which complies with the requirement of Article 133 of the Constitution.

It is not unconstitutional and § 8 of the JSA, which amends Article 34, paragraph 1 of the JSA. It is obvious that the interested persons can appeal against decisions of the SJC to the Supreme Administrative Court only when they have the character of individual administrative acts, taking into account the Interpretative Decision № 2/2002 under c.d. № 2 of 2002

There is no constitutional obstacle to the establishment by law of the position of judicial assistant in the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court. These are qualified lawyers to assist judges in their actual judicial activity. That is why § 59 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which creates a new Article 148a of the JSA, is not unconstitutional.

VII. On the unconstitutionality of the whole law

The declaring unconstitutional part of the provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is not of the nature of unconstitutionality of the entire law, therefore this request should be rejected.

In view of all the above and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

1. Declares unconstitutional the following provisions of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Judiciary Act (SG, issue 74/2002), namely:

- § 1, item 2, which amends Art. 20, para 3 JSA;

- § 3, item 1, item “a”, which amends Art.

- § 3, item 1, item “b”, which supplements Art. 27, para 1, item 6 JSA;

- § 3, v.1, b. “D” in the part with which in art. 27, para 1 JSA a new item 10 is created, regarding the words “summarized by the Minister of Justice”;

- § 3, v.1, b. "D", which in Article 27, paragraph 1 of the JSA creates a new item 14;

- § 4, item 1, which amends Art. 28, para 1 JSA;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1 JSA regarding the words “the bailiff, the entry judges and the court employees” and the words “through the Minister of Justice, who within 7 days sends them to the Supreme Judicial Council with an opinion ”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 1, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “based on a proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meetings of the prosecutors by the respective prosecutor's offices”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 7, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 9, b. “A” JSA regarding the words “based on a proposal of the general assembly of the district court”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 10, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meetings of the investigators from the district investigation services”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 2 JSA;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 3 JSA;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 4 JSA;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 5 JSA regarding the words “of the general meetings and”;

- § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 8 JSA;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35a, para 1 JSA;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35a, para 2 JSA;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35b JSA;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35d JSA;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35e JSA;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35f, para 2 JSA regarding the words “to the Minister of Justice”;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35f, para 6 JSA regarding the words “the Minister of Justice, coordinated with”;

- § 9 in the part of art. 35f, para 7 JSA regarding the words “the Minister of Justice in coordination with”;

- § 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 1 JSA regarding the words “bailiff and entry judges”;

- § 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 2, item 1 JSA;

- § 13 amending and supplementing Article 59 of the JSA;

- § 14, item 2 in the part of art. 63, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 15, which amends Article 69, paragraph 2 of the JSA;

- § 16, which amends and supplements Article 76 of the JSA;

- § 17, item 2 in the part of art. 79, para 1, item 2, b. “A” and “b” JSA regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 23, which in Art. 100, para 1 JSA creates a new item 6, regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 27, which amends Article 114, paragraph 6 of the JSA, regarding the words “of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 35, which amends Article 125 JSA;

- § 36, which creates Art. 125a JSA;

- § 40 in the part of art. 129, para 1 JSA regarding the words “initially”;

- § 43, which creates Article 131a JSA;

- § 45, item 1, which amends Art. 134, para 3 JSA, in the part regarding the words “or by not less than one fifth of the members of the Supreme Judicial Council”;

- § 45, item 2, which creates para 4 in art. 134 JSA;

- § 54, which amends Article 143 of the JSA;

- § 55, which amends Article 144 JSA;

- § 69, which amends Article 163 of the JSA, in the part regarding the words “under conditions and by order determined by an ordinance of the Minister of Justice”;

- § 85, which creates a new para 3 in art. 190 JSA.

2. Dismisses the remainder of the request of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of Cassation.

 
Special opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov

I signed the decision of March 26, 2002 under c.d. № 17/2001 with a special opinion on some of the disputed provisions of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for the radio and television (ZIDZRT). My considerations are the following:

1. The radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit are specific objects, common to the public and their use by individual states is carried out through international agreements (Decision № 18 of 30 June 1998 under Code of Civil Procedure № 17/98, SG, No. 77 of 1998). They are a limited resource and the state exercises sovereign rights over them, determining by law the terms and conditions under which it grants permits (licenses) for their use - Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution.

The state cannot renounce the constitutionally granted rights only to it and cede them to a non-state body, because this would be a violation of the Constitution (Decision № 33 of 8.12.1998 under Code of Civil Procedure № 30/98, SG, issue 147 of 1998).

Both the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements, are treated equally in Article 18 of the Constitution, which requires the same legal framework at the legal level. This is not complied with by the LPISD. Its provisions provide for the participation of the state - in the person of the Communications Regulation Commission (CRC) - only when the radio or television programs are broadcast by terrestrial broadcasting, ie. by broadcasting from terrestrial radio transmitters. When the distribution of programs takes place via satellite, ie. by using the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country by international agreements, ZIDZRT does not provide for any participation of the state, although it still has sovereign rights in these cases. The same law completely eliminates the state in the distribution of programs through positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country, and with § 46 creates Article 125a, according to which “Persons wishing to create radio or television programs for distribution by means other than terrestrial broadcasting, are subject to registration ”, and it is carried out by the non-governmental body Council for Electronic Media (CEM). The opinion of the legislator, who adopted the Law on Public Procurement, that the state should not participate when radio or television programs are broadcast through geostationary orbit positions, determined for our country, is clearly expressed in § 53 (1), according to which carrying out radio or television activity via satellite, go through a registration mode.

The mentioned § 46 and § 53 (1), as well as § 13 - art. 32, para 1, item 13 and § 14; § 26 - Article 106, paragraph 3; § 34 - Article 116; §37 - art. 116c, para 1, 2 and 4, envisage state participation only in case of distribution of programs by terrestrial radio broadcasting, but not by satellite, ie. through positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country by international agreements. Therefore, these provisions of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights contradict Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution.

The Law on Radio and Television must contain provisions in accordance with Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution, regardless of whether at the time of its adoption the technical means for telecommunications specified in the same constitutional provision are applied or this will happen in the future. , during the operation of the law. The same legislator in a relatively short time after the adoption of the disputed LULUCF acted exactly like this, making changes in the Telecommunications Act (TA), SG, issue 112 of 2001 and fully harmonizes Article 27, paragraph 4 of the TA with Article 18. , para 3 and 5 of the Constitution.

2. The sovereign rights of the state on the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country, are reduced only to giving information by the state body CRC to the non-state CEM, whether there are free radio frequencies and what are their parameters (§ 13 - art. 32, para 9, item 13). The state body is deprived of the right to discretion. He is engaged by the decision of the CEM both in the issuance of a telecommunications license and in its transfer (§ 26 - art. 106, para. 3), termination (§ 42 - art. 121, para. 2), revocation (§ 44 - art. 123a), continuation (§ 45 - art. 125, para 3). The Article 116c, para 2, created by § 37, even stipulates that the CEM, after holding a competition, decides to issue not only a license for radio or television activity, but also an individual license for telecommunications activity. Thus, the sovereign rights of the state under Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Constitution are granted to a non-state body. In the mentioned provisions of the Act, the participation of the state is limited to informing whether or not there are free radio frequencies. This contradicts the nature of the rights of the state under Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. They are sovereign, ie. with the widest possible range, include an assessment not only whether but also to whom to provide the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country by international agreements.

Due to the above, the above provisions of the Act are unconstitutional.

3. Paragraph 25 creates para 6 to art. 105, according to which the applicants for a license for radio or television activity must submit to the CEM documents for the origin of the capital for the last 3 years, including a certified accounting report.

The one created by § 46 para 2 of art. 125a stipulates that those wishing to register must submit to the CEM the documents under art. 111, which text has also been amended (with § 29), but only for which body it is submitted to. the application - instead of before the state CRC before the non-state CEM. In the rest of it, containing an exhaustive list of the documents attached to the application, there is no change . Between these documents in item 6 is indicated a declaration that the circumstances under art. 105, para 4 are not present, but not under the newly created para 6, referring to the origin of the capital. Article 105 now has a new paragraph 6, but Article 111 does not refer to it with the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights and this is the difference between applicants for licensing and those for registration - only the former provide data on the origin of their capital in the last 3 years will perform radio or television activities. Data on the origin of the capital are necessary for the same reasons, because the activity is the same, regardless of the technical way of its implementation. Unjustifiably created different legal conditions for the same economic activity, which violates Article 19, para. .2 of the Constitution. Therefore, § 46 - art. 125a, para 2, is an unconstitutional provision.

 
Special opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

I signed the decision with a dissenting opinion for the following reasons:

І. Concerning a violation under Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution

Article 1, paragraph 1 of the RTA stipulates that the law regulates radio and television activity. Paragraph 2 stipulates that radio and television activity is the creation of radio and television programs and additional information through appropriate distribution, which are intended for immediate reception by an unlimited number of persons. It follows that the RTA regulates the creation, production of radio and television programs intended for distribution, and not their distribution itself. The distribution regime is subject to the Telecommunications Act. Article 1 of it states that it "regulates the public relations related to the implementation of telecommunications in the Republic of Bulgaria". The conclusion is that when considering the regulations established by the Act, we must keep in mind that this refers to the process of creating, producing programs, and not to their dissemination.

Until the amendment of the Radio and Television Act (SG, issue 96 of 2001) there was a uniform regime for all producers of programs - licensing. The amendment of the law creates a dual regime in view of the way in which the program is distributed. Pursuant to § 25 of the LRA, Art. 105, para 1 of the LRA stipulates that radio and television activity through the use of available and / or construction, maintenance and use of new telecommunication networks for terrestrial radio broadcasting is carried out on the basis of a license. Registration is sufficient for non-terrestrial distribution.

The opinion of the National Assembly in the present case maintains that those who want something from the state and those who do not engage in anything should not be subjected to the same regime. Excerpts from Decision № 7/1996 of the Constitutional Court (SG, issue 55 of 96) are indicated, in which a recommendation is given for mitigation of the licensing regime in the indicated cases and the transition to registration. It should be noted, however, that the decision and the cited passages do not refer to the substantive part, to the creation of a program, but to its transmission, its distribution - the telecommunications part. The decision is in relation to "access to the air", not in connection with the creation of a program. Paragraph 46 of the LULUCF, which creates the new Article 125a of the RTA, establishes a registration regime for persons wishing to create programs for distribution by non-terrestrial technical means, and does not regulate the transfer of programs. The creation of a program is not related to how it will be transferred.

A dual program design regime first establishes an unequal position of some businesses compared to others. In addition, inequalities are created with regard to the consumers of the respective programs. With the issuance of the license, which will set certain rules that are not required to comply with producers of programs that are only registered, consumers will be provided with a different product depending on whether the creator of the program is licensed or only registered .

The difference also creates different working conditions for the entities that produce programs. Privileges are established for some and at the same time more severe treatment of others. All this violates Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The creation of a radio and television program is generally done under the same conditions, regardless of how it will be transmitted - terrestrial or non-terrestrial. The different regime introduced by the Law on Public Health Insurance puts producers under different legal conditions. The way in which the program will be transmitted does not give any grounds for this. Once produced, the program can be transmitted in one way or another, depending on who the manufacturer will distribute it to.

The inequalities created by the LULUCF in view of the different treatment of the created programs with license and through registration are significant:

- according to art. 109, para 1 of the RTA the licenses are issued for a period of 15 years, while according to art. 125, para 7 the registrations are indefinite;

- in case of revocation or termination of a license for a program on some grounds the respective telecommunication license is also terminated (art. 121, art. 123a RTA), while from deletion of the registration due to systematic violations of the law (art. 126a, para 4 RTA) no revocation of the relevant telecommunications license;

- different are the financial penalties for violation of licensing and registration regime. Of course, the legislator has the right to determine one or another sanction, but in this case different sanctions are determined for the same activity - creating programs;

- licensed operators have national, regional or local coverage. This follows from Article 110, paragraph 1, item 5 of the RTA. Such restrictions are not set for the registered operators (Art. 125a, para 4, sentence 2 of the RTA). In this way they gain national reach;

- the difference in the term and scope of action of the licensed and registered operators puts them at a disadvantage and in the implementation of their economic activity - planned investments, etc .;

- the licensing of radio and television operators also affects national security issues. Putting some operators out of control from this point of view not only creates inequality, but also affects national security. The registration regime makes it impossible to set specific conditions in its defense, which is sometimes necessary and does not allow for control and sanctions. For example, the license may stipulate that in certain circumstances the program will have to meet certain national security needs. This cannot be done during registration. Given that the range of transmitters by satellite and cable is particularly wide, there is no reason to exclude them from national security protection rules, as allowed by the licensing regime;

- Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, creating and guaranteeing to all citizens equal conditions for economic activity, also protects the consumer. It follows from the text that consumer protection must be the same. The creation of a different regime for different program producers, in which some of them are obliged to comply with certain rules established by the license and others not, establishes inequality of the audience regarding the product served to it. In the case of a license, it will comply with the rules it sets, and in the registration regime everything will be left to the discretion of the manufacturer. The uniform regulation of the programs in terms of content, no matter how they are transmitted, guarantees the equal protection that the Constitution gives to the consumer.

The regulation of the programs should not be made dependent on the way in which they reach the viewer. This is because in any way - terrestrial or non-terrestrial, the program is equally accepted by him. With the revocation of the licenses for some programs, the possibility for explicit recording of a number of specific obligations of the registered operators, which the licensed operators will have, disappears. Registered operators, for example, will not be required to observe a certain technical quality in the production of the programs, which would be a condition for granting the license;

- the amendments to the law introduce the so-called tied licensing of radio and television operators for programs, on the one hand, and of the same persons as telecommunications operators for terrestrial broadcasting of programs via radio frequency spectrum, on the other hand. Upon receipt, revocation, termination or transfer of the program license, the same is automatically done under the license under the Telecommunications Act for distribution of the respective program through spectrum. Until the amendment, the RTA provided for separate licensing of content and separate licensing of distribution. Not every operator makes a program. There may be businesses that only distribute but not produce programs. With the licensing of terrestrial distributors bound by the amendment of the law, this possibility is taken away, and this puts in an unequal position those economic entities that simultaneously produce and distribute programs by the entities that do not want to produce programs, but only to distribute them. . Bound licensing works in the analog industry, but is not applicable to digital, through which a distributor can serve a number of programs. This creates inequalities between the analogue and digital industries. The licensing regime provided for in § 34 of the LRA, amending Article 116 of the LRA and the procedure under Art. 116a, 116b, 116c, 116d of the LRA, established by § 35, 36, 37 and 38 of the LRA, for licensing a program and distribution is not applicable to applicants for digital television and radio, as one broadcaster has the technical capability to broadcast more than one program. If a program producer who is under the licensing regime is also a distribution licensee, he may be deprived of the opportunity to broadcast his programs through it by other program producers who have only registered them, but who use the digital distributor of that program, who has obtained a license for both program and distribution. If the licensee's license is revoked, then other software vendors that have used the digital distributor will automatically lose the opportunity to operate.

ІІ. Regarding violations under Art. 18, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution

In Decision № 33/1998 (SG, issue 147 of 1998) the Constitutional Court stated that the sovereign rights on the radio frequency spectrum are exercised only by the state and only it can issue permits for carrying out activities through the radio frequency spectrum, as well as it cannot cede these rights to a non-state body because it is a violation of the Constitution. In the presence of Art. 18, para 3 of the Constitution, the provision of the spectrum and the geostationary orbit for use cannot but be carried out only by a state body. The same decision states that the state, through a state body designated by law, licenses any activity carried out using the radio frequency spectrum. The Constitutional Court has had cases to take a firm view that the radio and television regulatory body is not a state body. The Council for Electronic Media, established with the amendments to the Law on Radio and Television, is constituted in the same way as the previous NRTC. Therefore, what has been expressed by the Constitutional Court so far with regard to the NRTC has full force for the CEM as well. Both in Decision № 21/1996 (SG, issue 102 of 1996) and in Decision № 10/1999 (SG, issue 60 of 1999) the Constitutional Court ruled that the regulatory body for radio and television, the then NRTC was a non-governmental body. Decision № 21/1996 states that the NRTC can only issue an opinion on permits. It is noted that "according to Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, the state exercises sovereign rights over the radio frequency spectrum and its indisputable right and obligation to allocate available frequencies includes its right to receive advisory opinions from whomever it deems appropriate." It is further clarified that the provisions (Article 15, item 2 of the RTA) neither oblige nor restrict the competent state body to grant the requested concession. There is no reason for the Constitutional Court to deviate from its opinion expressed so far and to accept that the CEM, as a non-state body, will be able to license activity carried out via radio frequency spectrum. The adoption of the permit, which gives ZIDZRT, means a sharp turn in the practice of the Constitutional Court - creating a contradictory practice. This is true, although according to § 13 of the LRA, after the amendment of Art. 32, para 1 and the created new item 13 of the RTA, CRC provides preliminary information to the CEM regarding the technical parameters necessary for terrestrial radio broadcasting of radio and television programs for the indicated from the CEM settlement, region or for the whole territory of the Republic of Bulgaria, including free radio frequencies, permissible transmission capacities, as well as other necessary technical information. The license subsequently granted by CRC does not change things. The remaining power of CRC is only formal, because CRC has no other option but to grant the license to the person for whom the CEM has decided. In this way the constitutionally established by Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Constitution right and obligation of the state to exercise directly sovereign rights over the radio frequency spectrum is circumvented. In fact, these rights pass with the new legislation to a non-governmental body, such as the CEM, and CRC only formally implements its decision.  

According to the above arguments, I consider that they contradict Article 19, paragraph 2 and Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution: § 1, § 6 (regarding Article 20, paragraph 1 of the RTA), § 13 (without art. 32, para. 1, item 12 of the RTA), § 23 (regarding art. 102, para. 1, item 2 of the RTA), § 25, § 26 (regarding art. 106, para. 3 of the RTA) ), §§ 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, § 42 (regarding the created new para 2 of art. 121 RTA), § 43, § 44, § 45 (regarding the amendment of art. 125, para 2 and 3 ZRT), § 46, § 48 and § 53 of ZIDZRT.

JUDGMENT № 1
Sofia, 26 March 2002
constitutional case № 17/2001
Judge-Rapporteur Rumen Yankov
( Promulgated, SG No. 35 of 5 April 2002) 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov - Rapporteur, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on December 5, 2001 at the request of 50 MPs from the XXXIX National Assembly in order to establish the unconstitutionality of part of the provisions of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Radio and Television (ZIDZRT) - promulgated, SG, No. 96 of 2001, amended, SG No. 112/2001 and their inconsistency with the European Convention on Transfrontier Television - promulgated, SG No. 32/1999.

By a ruling of 15 January 2002, the Constitutional Court allowed for consideration on the merits only the request for unconstitutionality of certain texts of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

The National Assembly (NA), the Council of Ministers (CoM), the Bulgarian National Television, the Bulgarian National Radio, the Council for Electronic Media (CEM), the Communications Regulation Commission (CRC) and the Bulgarian Media Coalition (BMC) have been constituted as stakeholders.

Within the set term, opinions were received from the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the CEM, the CRC and the BMC.

In order to rule on the request, the Constitutional Court took into account the following:

A. Under § 1, by which in art. 3, para 2 the words “or registrations” have been added; § 6, by which in art. 20, para 1 the words “by registration or” have been added; § 13, by which a new item 16 has been created in art. 32, para 1; § 23, by which in art. 102, para 1, item 2 are added the words “registration fees”; § 25, by which a new para 6 has been created in art. 105; § 46, by which Article 125a has been created in Section IV; § 48, which created Art. 126a, para 3 and 4, and § 53

The petitioners claim that the law provides for a licensing and registration regime for the creation and distribution of radio and television programs. From this point of view, according to them, the Law on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms contradicts Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as it regulates two different in content and weight legal regimes for the same activity.

CRC believes that the rights of the audience should be equally guaranteed regardless of the transmission environment of the programs. In this sense, it maintains that ,, need to support the request of MPs that if the legislature based on the level of legal protection is sufficient, the licensing regime should be repealed in respect of all and be replaced by registration. "

The opinions of the National Assembly, Council of Ministers, CEM, BMC, excluding the nuances in the interpretation of the disputed texts of the law, can be summarized - differences in the regulation of the activity of operators of terrestrial distribution of programs, on the one hand, and those who distribute programs. , on the other hand, by means other than terrestrial, do exist, but they are conditioned by the fact that the state exercises sovereign rights in the field of limited radio spectrum.

The provision of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution in its first hypothesis states that the law creates and guarantees to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity. This means that the state must build such a system of regulation that guarantees equal legal conditions for all citizens and legal entities in the overall aspect of its content - origin, nature and termination.

In addition, it should be noted that radio and television operators, regardless of the specifics of radio and television activity, which is mainly expressed in information, social, cultural and political functions, also carry out activities with a certain economic focus. The direct investments of the operators in the separate media, the advertising, through which the interests of the producers are represented, the information of any kind directly or indirectly contribute to the circulation of capital. Therefore, the radio and television activity carried out not only by the commercial, but also by the public radio and television operators, regulated by the RTA, must be in compliance with the provisions of the Constitution, referring to the activity of the economic subjects.

The radio frequency spectrum of the country is within strictly defined limits, specified in § 1, item 21 of the transitional and final provisions of the Telecommunications Act (TA). The text is a consequence of an international agreement to which our country is a party.

First of all, it should be borne in mind that the licensing regime is currently mandatory in view of the explicit provision of Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution, according to which the state exercises sovereign rights with respect to radio spectrum. Secondly, the availability of limited radio frequency spectrum requires state intervention in another direction - not to violate international agreements, and to provide candidates for operators for terrestrial radio and television activities with an unoccupied radio frequency resource.

This imposes the conclusion that the licensing regime is a projection of the constitutional obligation of the state to distribute the available frequencies (Decision № 21 of 14.11.96 under Code of Civil Procedure № 19/96, item 5) and of the objective limitation of the frequency resource for terrestrial broadcasting of radio and television programs.

The provisions of § 46, which established Art. 125a et seq.

The registration regime is a step towards deregulation of media activity. Operators wishing to engage in radio and television activities are facilitated by registering on: a procedure that is easier compared to the licensing one; band that is not related to the limited frequency resource; term, as limited frequencies are not used. The scope of the persons to seek, receive and disseminate information is also expanded - Article 41 of the Constitution. Or the regime is in line with the constitutionally enshrined right to free economic initiative.

It is logical to assume in this situation that the existence of objective preconditions for licensing of terrestrial radio and television broadcasting should not result in the introduction of a similar regime for other operators creating programs for distribution through other technical means.

The existence of equal legal conditions for the exercise of economic activity is correlated with the right to freely choose how to exercise the activity - as a terrestrial operator or an operator through registration. The difference in regimes is not a prerequisite for their participation, but a consequence of their choice. However, once made the choice, the operator is subject to differences within the individual mode.

The MPs substantiate their allegation of contradiction with those listed in Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, comparing the different conditions and requirements for carrying out the activity contained in the two regimes.

A brief analysis of the disputed norms is required:

1. Standards relating to the newly introduced registration regime.

The provisions of § 1, by which in art. 3, para 2 the words “or registrations” have been added; § 6, by which in art. 20, para 1 the words “by registration or” have been added; § 13, by which in art. 32, para 1 a new item 16 has been created with content “performs or deletes registrations for carrying out radio and television activity in the cases provided by law”; § 23, with which in art. 102, para 1, item 2 are added the words “ registration fees ” can be thematically united, because all of them concern the newly introduced registration regime for carrying out radio and television activity. It was concluded above that the regime is a step towards deregulation in accordance with the Constitution and that the provisions regulating it do not contradict Article 19 , paragraph 2 .

2. Inequality of operators in terms of deadlines for radio and television activities.

According to § 28, which amended Article 109 of the Act, the term for license of programs distributed through terrestrial means is 15 years, while according to § 46, which created Article 125a, paragraph 7, the distribution of programs through other technical ways is indefinite.

The Constitutional Court held that the difference was objectively determined. The limited radio frequency resource is provided by the state, which exercises its rights under Art. 18, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution. It also determines the term of use. The creation of radio and television programs for distribution by cable, satellite or other technical means is not related to the use of a limited radio frequency resource. The manner of distribution of the created program in the second case is carried out through own or agreed for use foreign telecommunication means. The principle of freedom of contract, which is a consequence of free economic initiative, excludes the right of the state to set the terms of contracts in this area.

Therefore, § 46, which established Article 125a, paragraph 7 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights, is not unconstitutional.

3. Inequality of radio and television operators with regard to the revocation or termination of their telecommunications licenses.

The petitioners claim that , in case of revocation or termination of the license for distribution of a program on other grounds (without seeking grounds), the telecommunications license is revoked or terminated, while in case of deletion of registration in case of systematic violation of the law (Art. 126a, para. 4) the respective telecommunication licenses shall not be revoked ”.

The claim is unfounded. Each terrestrial operator has two individual licenses - for a RTA program and a telecommunications program under the Telecommunications Act. Upon termination or revocation of the program license, it is imperative that the telecommunications license for broadcasting on a certain frequency, in respect of which the state has sovereign rights, be revoked. This is necessary due to the functional dependence of the two types of licenses. As regards the operators registered under the RTA, the radio and television programs created by them are distributed by technical means, other than the terrestrial one, without using a radio frequency resource. Therefore, the law is clear for them - according to the disputed text, only the registration is deleted because there is no mentioned connection between a program and a radio frequency network. Termination will result in a ban on distribution only of the program via its own or another's cable network, satellite or other technical means other than terrestrial.

Therefore, the norm of § 48, which created Article 126a, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the RTA, is not unconstitutional.

4. Inequality of operators in terms of property sanctions.

According to the petitioners, the property sanctions for licensed and registered operators differ in grounds and amount. The former are sanctioned not only for violation of the RTA and for violation of the license - § 48, which created Article 126a, paragraphs 1 and 2, while the latter for violation of the requested program project, program profile or program scheme - § 48, by which Art. 126a, para 3 and 4 of the Law on Public Procurement has been created. In this sense, registered operators are placed at a disadvantage compared to licensed ones.

The Constitutional Court considers that sanctions provided by law may be the subject of a constitutional analysis in view of the provision of Article 5, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. Obviously this is not the case. The legislator has the right to introduce a different regime of administrative sanctions, their type and amount, as he did in the chapter Administrative Penal Provisions of the RTA.

5. Inequality of operators in terms of the scope of the programs.

According to the petitioners, the licensed operators explicitly provide for national, regional and local scope - Article 110, paragraph 1, item 5 of the RTA. In the case of those registered in view of the provision of § 46, by which Art. 125a, para 4 of the Act has been established, no restrictions may be placed related to the scope and distribution of the program.

The Constitutional Court finds that differences exist, but they are not grounds for unconstitutionality. Broadcasters receive a certain resource that the state can provide because it is dependent on the technical limitations of the radio frequency spectrum. As for the distribution of programs through other technical means, there are no practical restrictions. And this is because the law, in line with the requirement of freedom of economic initiative, does not limit the number of satellite transponders, the persons who own cable networks and their construction throughout the country. No framework can be set for possible arrangements between these owners and non-air broadcasters. The created RTA programs can be freely distributed via satellite, cable or other technical means.

In this sense, in § 46, which created Art. 125a, para 4, the expression “ No restrictions related to the scope of distribution of the program may be set during the registration” is not unconstitutional.

6. Inequality of operators in terms of capital requirements.

The petitioners claim that there is an inequality of operators with regard to the requirements for proving the origin of capital. According to them, such exist only for licensed operators. Only for them, as candidate operators, a list of media companies in which they are shareholders or partners is required. According to the petitioners, there is no justification for not applying these requirements to applicants for registration.

The Constitutional Court finds that the complaint is not factually justified. According to Article 111 of the RTA , the applicant must obtain a declaration that the circumstances under Article 108 of the RTA are not present (that no shares, stocks or other rights are held under the antitrust law of the country). They must also submit a declaration under Article 105, paragraph 4 of the law (part of the requirements under this declaration are to prove the ownership of property or capital under Article 6 of the Law on Measures against Money Laundering, as well as under Article 105 , para 6 ZIDZRT the origin of the capital for the last three years). And according to the provision of § 46, which created a new art. 125a ZIDZRT, those wishing to register submit to the CEM the documents under art. 111. In this way, through the referring rule, the regime of both categories of operators is unified with regard to the establishment of the origin of capital.

Therefore, it cannot be argued that the parties are not equal. Paragraph 25, which created a new para 6 in Art. 105 and § 46, which created Art.

7. Unforeseen protection of national security.

The petitioners claim that national security was protected only by the issuance of licenses, which set specific conditions for the content of the programs, which is not a requirement when the registration regime is introduced.

National security is a constitutional value and its protection may be grounds for restriction of fundamental rights under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution in the hypothesis of Article 57, paragraph 3 in compliance with the principle of proportionality of restrictions. There are no norms in the provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities that restrict the right to seek, receive and impart information. As far as things are not put on this plane, in this case there is no constitutional case. Whether there is a threat to national security must be judged in the light of the specific factual situation and the mechanisms for its protection under current legislation.

8. The lack of guarantees for the protection of users of programs - viewers and listeners.

According to the petitioners, the meaning of the definition “scope of the program” in § 46, which created Art. 125a, para 4, is for the regulator to require the program content according to the specifics of the region and the settlement. " In this sense, already licensed program operators with a scope distributed by individual rural cable networks automatically acquire the status of national radio and television programs." Therefore, consumers were not protected as the structured cable market was collapsing.

The claim of the petitioners is a consequence of the misinterpretation of the law. The term "scope of the program" should be understood in a spatial (geographical) rather than substantive (programmatic) sense. The program content is determined by the CEM under the rules of the RTA and it may refuse registration in case of non-compliance of a project, concept, profile or irregularities of the documents under § 46, which created Article 125a, paragraph 4 of the Law on RTA. So regulatory rules exist.

9. Paragraph 53 of the transitional and final provisions of the Act.

In their additional statement, the MPs clarified that their request to declare this provision unconstitutional concerns the possibility for the CEM to issue an official certificate of registration of radio and television operators who hold licenses for radio and television broadcasting within six months. activity by cable or satellite, after presentation of the documents under art. 125a, para 5, without payment of initial registration fee. According to them, the provision contradicts Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution in its part regarding the activity of economic entities.

It was argued above that the difference in the regulation of the two regimes is not unconstitutional. The content of the provision envisages nothing else but the existing licensed operators under the Telecommunications Act, who do not use a radio frequency resource, to be re-registered in accordance with the more liberal requirements of the current regime.

Ultimately, this is a transitional rule that regulates existing legal relations, which must be rearranged in accordance with the requirements of the new legislation, which are not unconstitutional.

B. Under § 13, item 2 in its part, with which in art. 32, para 1 are created items 14 and 15; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37, 38, with which are created respectively Art.   

The petitioners claim that the CEM in its capacity as a non-state body has powers that are followed by the state body CRC.

Indeed, according to the current provision, the CEM is holding a competition for the issuance of a license for radio and television activities through the use of available and / or construction, maintenance and use of new telecommunication networks for terrestrial broadcasting. At the request of an interested person or on its own initiative, it shall hold a competition for issuing a license under the procedure of Art. 116, Art. 116a, Art. 116b, Art. 116c. However, the procedure starts only in the presence of free radio frequency spectrum, a circumstance which is established by CRC. On the other hand, only with a positive decision of the commission, which applies a draft license for telecommunications activity, the tender procedure continues. The foregoing shows that the Commission's decision is an independent legal basis for obtaining a license. Furthermore, the law does not regulate a hypothesis under which a RTA license may be issued if CRC refuses to present evidence of the availability of free radio frequency spectrum or to issue a license for telecommunications activity.

By the way, no matter how the licensing model is determined - unified, bound or unbound, the nature of the CRC functions must be judged by the provisions of the RTA and by the special law regulating its activity - the Telecommunications Act. Thus, Article 27, item 4 of the Telecommunications Act in an imperative mood contains the rule that CRC issues, amends, supplements, suspends, terminates and revokes licenses that use radio frequency spectrum or the positions of the geostationary orbit. In this direction is also art. 62, para 1, item 8 of the Telecommunications Act - when with a decision of CRC the telecommunication license for distribution of the grounds provided in para 1 is terminated, the license under RTA is revoked by CEM only after the entry into force of the decision of the state body.

The conclusion from the interpretation of the law is that the state within the framework of the Constitution has not provided the powers of the CEM provided for in Art. 18, para 3 and 5.

C. Under § 13, by which in art. 32, para. 1 with a set item. 13, 14, 15; § 26, which in art. 106 is created para 3; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37 and 38, which created new Articles 116a, 116b, 116c, 116d; § 42, by which a new para 2 has been created as of Art. § 45, which amended Article 125, paragraph 3. § 44, which created art. 123a.  

The petitioners dispute the constitutionality of the texts of the Law on Public Procurement, which regulate the so-called “tied licensing” of the operators as distributors of RTA programs and of the same persons as telecommunications operators under the Telecommunications Act. According to them, the Constitution was violated because the regulation disadvantaged both sectors (analogue and digital) on the electronic media market and deprived consumers of the opportunity to use digital terrestrial television. Thus, the development of electronic media is blocked.

CRC's opinion is in a similar sense.

The BMC argues that there is a legal incompleteness, which is not a ground for unconstitutionality of the regime.

The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the CEM claim the opposite, that regulations exist, which circumstance was clear from the last wording of Article 27, item 12 of the Telecommunications Act, which regulates part of the powers of the new CRC regulatory body.

Specifically, the objection to the law is that there is no regulation of the digital way of broadcasting programs. The Constitutional Court finds that the absence of regulation in various spheres of economic activity could be connected with an assessment of expediency and hence with a disputed management decision or omission, but not as a ground for contradiction with the Constitution.

From this point of view, the court does not consider it necessary to analyze whether there is a regulation in the LULUCF of the allegations of a more suitable than technical and consumer value digital method of terrestrial distribution, since the allegation of its absence is not unconstitutional.

The norm of art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, last hypothesis states that the law protects the consumer. Its content must be understood in the sense that by law the consumer must be protected through certain standards for the quality of the offered goods and services, to provide protection against risks in their use.

It was claimed that consumers were deprived of the opportunity to use the digital method of broadcasting, which is considered to be preferred in terms of quality, in a terrestrial way.

The Constitutional Court considers that only the availability of a service gives grounds to discuss whether the law provides for protective norms for protection. The fact that the market is incomplete in a certain sphere of economic life is a shortcoming that cannot be associated with violated consumer rights in the present aspect.

Therefore, § 13, by which items 13, 14, 15 are created in Art. 32, cannot be declared unconstitutional; § 26, which in art. 106 is created para 3; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37 and 38, which created new Articles 116a, 116b, 116c, 116d; § 42, by which a new para 2 has been created as of Art. § 45, which amended Article 125, paragraph 3; § 44, which created art. 123a.

What all the texts listed here have in common is that they regulate various aspects of the RTA licensing procedure, according to the petitioners only for the analogue method of broadcasting. It was substantiated above that the lack of legal regulation of a certain economic activity in the given area cannot be a ground for declaring the norms unconstitutional.

D. Paragraph 13, by which a new item 12 has been created in Art. 32, para 1, which contradicts Art. 39, para 1 and Art. 40, para 1 of the Constitution.

According to the MPs, the power granted to the CEM to give mandatory instructions on the implementation of licenses for radio and television activities restricts freedom of speech and editorial independence in violation of Article 39, paragraph 1 and Article 40, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, and the provision of such intervention of the CEM only in respect of the licensed operators violates the principle of equality of economic entities within the meaning of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

CRC claims that the request is justified - opportunities were created for preliminary intervention through mandatory instructions in the "program schemes and the content of the programs, freedom in the selection of employees in the media."

Without giving any reasons, BMC considers that the request in this part is justified.

The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, and the CEM consider that this request is also unfounded. The norm was intended to eliminate an operational omission in the law, as the supervisory body had no way of exercising its powers.

According to the wording of § 13, which created item 12 of Article 32 of the Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting, the CEM may issue mandatory instructions for the implementation of licenses for radio and television activities.

The Constitutional Court held that the powers of the CEM thus formulated did not determine the content and nature of the instructions and did not contain rules by which to restrict freedom of speech and create an opportunity for the exercise of censorship. Thus, in the presence of a general norm, the CEM must comply with the provision of Article 9 of the RTA, proclaiming the free creation of programs and the exclusion of censorship in any form.

As for the possibility provided in § 13, which created item 12 of Article 32 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights, to give instructions, they can refer only to issues that are regulated by law on the implementation of the content of licenses, referred to in Article 110 of the RTA. These include the obligations to comply with Article 6, paragraph 3, Article 7, Article 10 and Article 19, and a schedule for achieving the ratios specified in Article 10, paragraphs 2 and 3. However, the latest listed texts of the RTA do not include interference in the content of the programs, but Article 11 of the RTA in the personnel policy of the operators.

Due to the stated considerations and on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, item 2 the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 50 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to declare the following provisions of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Radio and Television, promulgated, SG No. 96/2001 unconstitutional :

Paragraph 1, by which in Art. 3, para 2 the words “or registrations” have been added; § 6, which amended Art. 20, para 1 in the part regarding the words “through the registration or”; § 13, item 2, by which new items 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 are created in art. 32, para 1; § 23, which in art. 102, para 1, item 2 has been amended and the words “registration fees” have been added; § 25, item 2, by which in art. 105 para 6 has been created; § 26, which in art. 106 is created para 3; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37, 38, which created respectively 116a, 116b, 116c and 116d; § 42, item 2, by which in art. 121 para 2 has been created; § 44, by which art. 123a was created; § 45, which amended paragraph 3 of Article 125; § 46, which created Article 125a; § 48, by which art. 126a has been created in its part regarding para 3 and 4; and § 53 of the transitional and final provisions.


Special opinion of Judge Lyudmil Neykov

With this particular opinion to express its reservations concerning the admissibility of the requested interpretation of the provisions of Article 98, item 6, Article 100, paragraph 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution , through which can be given by the Constitutional Court reply of the question , whether subject to judicial control by the hand of the Supreme administrative Court referred in the texts “ suggestions ”, incl . and in cases , when the president of the republic has issued no decree on the basis of them .

I believe , that the answer to this question is not can not be given by the Constitutional Court in terms of mandatory interpretation of the provisions of Article 98, item 6, Article 100, paragraph 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution .

The request by way of mandatory interpretation to be given an answer to the question , as there is the exercise of judicial control over those acts is based on the absence of explicit legislation on this issue in the constitutional provision , whose interpretation is requested . I want to emphasize , that principle is opposed to such an interpretation of the Constitutional Court , which replaces the missing constitutional or legislative framework . This would mean the creation of a new constitutional framework , equivalent to supplementing the Constitution , which the Constitutional Court does not have the power to do .

In this case , however, will and lack of constitutional provisions . Constitutional legislator explicitly has regulated the possibility of judicial control of the acts of the Ministers Council and of ministers , as and of other acts , set out in law . This was done with the provision of Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution . Designated is competent for this authority in the face of the Supreme Administrative Court , which carried out the supreme supervision for precise and equal application of the laws in administrative justice and to rule on disputes about the legality of acts of the Ministers Council and of ministers , as and of other acts .

Exercise by the competent court in regulated by the Constitution judicial control in the referral him with relevant complaint presupposes before all assessment of the eligibility of the submitted complaint . In this judgment the court checked and if the complaint is directed against an administrative act . That is why if the subject of the appeal acts of the Ministers Council and of ministers , as well and other acts , referred to in the law is the question , on which the Constitution is determined the Supreme Administrative Court for the competent authority to give a response . Unacceptable is in the path of the requested interpretation of those texts of the Constitution to be given an answer to a question , which is constitutionally settled , although in another text of the Constitution , and even less in this way the Constitutional Court to seize of the Supreme Administrative Court powers , provided to him by the constitutional legislator .
Special opinion of Judge Todor Todorov

The request of the Prosecutor General, as admitted by the Constitutional Court, contains two main issues:

- what is the legal nature of the proposals mentioned in Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution, do they constitute an "administrative act in the proper sense";

- whether these proposals are subject to judicial review by the SAC and in cases where the President has issued a decree based on them.

In the answer to the questions thus posed, my understanding differs significantly from that of the court both in the argumentation and in the final conclusions. I must point out, however, that both the court and I are seeking solutions to specific, well-known to the public practical problems. Therefore, in the following pages the theoretical considerations and references are limited to the minimum possible, the regulation is analyzed in a pragmatic context.  , the exhibition has an instrumental character. For people who are not interested in the arguments, but in my position, I answer briefly: the real question is not whether the proposals of the Council of Ministers and the SJC are administrative acts, but whether they are subject to appeal; only the SAC is competent to answer this question; this does not prevent the Constitutional Court from examining the decrees entirely as a court of fact; the incompetence of the body does not always lead to the nullity of the acts issued by it.

To illustrate, I will give a concrete example: If the SJC adopts an illegal decision in violation of the Judiciary Act and proposes to the President on the basis of Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution the dismissal of the Prosecutor General, then in my opinion the Prosecutor General can challenge this proposal before the SAC by the order of art. 5, item 2 of the SAC before the decree of the President; the court has only jurisdiction to assess whether that proposal falls within the scope of the contested acts and to declare it invalid; if a decree has already been issued, it may be challenged before the Constitutional Court, but not by the Prosecutor General, who loses this capacity at the same time as the decree enters into force; the latter circumstance shows why the right of the Prosecutor General to protest the decisions of the SJC before the administrative court is so important, it may be his only defense. Therefore, the opinion that the Constitutional Court may deny the jurisdiction of the SAC (as ruled by the decision) and deprive the Prosecutor General of the right to judicial protection against unlawful dismissal seems to me constitutionally unfounded and life-threatening. The following statement should be read from this angle of view.

І. On the legal nature of the term "proposal" in the Constitution

1. There are various "proposals" in the Constitution

There is no known constitutional definition of the term "proposal". It is obvious that in the Constitution it is used with different meanings. It is absurd to claim that the proposal of one fifth of the MPs to vote no confidence in the Council of Ministers (Art. 89, para. 1) or the proposal to hold debates on a question (Art. 90, para. 2) have the same legal nature, which have the proposal for appointment of a head of diplomatic mission abroad (art. 98, item 6) or the proposal for appointment of a chief prosecutor (art. 129, para 2). It is obvious that these are acts of different legal nature and functions, for which the Constitution uses the same term. The use in the Constitution of the same terms for different acts suggests that it is possible to use different terms for identical in nature acts. Decisive should not be the superficial linguistic analysis (decision or proposal), but the legal nature and functions of the act.    

2. Any "proposal" is a solution

It is a misconception that the decision to make a proposal and the proposal itself are two different acts. Considered as speech acts, all proposals are solutions. On the one hand, they are executives - they contain decisions in favor or against a certain course of action ( decision to propose…); on the other hand, at the same time they are commissions - they oblige their authors to a certain line of conduct (to propose ( ). As Austin (John Longshaw) points out, the connection between the executive and the commission here is as close as between meaning and implication . Speaking in the language of the problem we are interested in here, all the proposals mentioned are solutions. Every proposal implies a solution, the decision implies a proposal. From a logical and therefore from a legal point of view, the proposal cannot be separated from the decision to make it. The two are a single act, regardless of the possible technical, clerical layout in two different documents. By its legal nature, any proposal is a decision.            

3. Not every decision is an act of an administrative body

Every proposal is a decision, but not every decision is an act of an administrative body. From a legal point of view, the above proposals, for example, differ significantly from each other. The constitutional status of their authors is different (not all of them are administrative bodies), the competencies of the latter (not all of them have managerial competencies), the goals and functions of their acts. For example, the subject under Article 89, paragraph 1 of the Constitution (one fifth of the Members of Parliament) is not an administrative body. However, the bodies that issue the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution are administrative bodies.

The mobile and complex subject matter of political (governing or parliamentary) acts, as well as the understanding of the immunity from judicial review available to them, can be discussed separately . In my opinion, this is not required by the subject matter of the case.    

4. The procedural proposals differ from each other

However, it is inevitable to find a significant difference from a constitutional point of view between the proposals included in the subject matter of the case - under Article 98, item 6 and Article 100, paragraph 2, on the one hand, and the proposal under Article 129, paragraph 2. , on the other hand. This difference is formally and legally expressed in the binding force of the proposal for the President and is practically important for the assessment of the legal interest in his independent appeal, regardless of the President's decree. A brief comparative analysis of the system confirms this.    

5. The proposals under art. 98, item 6 and art. 100, para 2

The first two proposals were addressed to the President in his capacity as the bearer of key constitutional functions in the field of international relations and in the field of defense and the armed forces. In both cases, there is no doubt that the body making the proposals (the Council of Ministers) is a supreme administrative body; that he has constitutionally established managerial competencies in the above two areas (Article 105, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution); that the purpose and functions of the proposals made are the exercise of its sovereign powers in the field of international relations and defense. Therefore, there is no doubt that these proposals are acts of administration , regardless of whether and to what extent they are administrative acts according to the legal definition of Article 2 of the Administrative Procedure Act. With regard to their legal force for the President, the following should be briefly noted:  

5.1. The president may refuse to issue a decree. Constitutional powers, as well as the status of the head of state established in international law, derive from state sovereignty and reveal the special place of the president in the implementation of international relations and defense. In this context, the powers of the President under Article 98, item 6 and Article 100, paragraph 2 of the Constitution should also be considered. He may refuse to comply with the proposal of the Council of Ministers and this refusal does not constitute a violation of the Constitution.   

5.2. The Council of Ministers and the President have joint competence. Therefore, in both cases, the proposals of the Council of Ministers are made conditional on a presidential decree; the latter also has significant competences in the relevant field. The constitutional framework binds the competencies of the two bodies, the so-called joint competence (thus explicitly also Decision № 13 of 30 September 1999 under Code of Civil Procedure № 9/99, SG No. 88/1999). An expression of this joint competence is the requirement for countersignature by the Prime Minister or the respective Minister as a constitutive element for the validity of the decree - Article 102, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.   

Conflicts may arise between the two bodies in the exercise of their joint competence, but no legal mechanisms are provided for their possible resolution. Only the way to be resolved by political means within the framework of the general constitutional obligation for interaction between the authorities remains open.

6. The proposal under art. 129, para 2

The regulation of the proposal under Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is significantly different. From the point of view of the body that does it, it is an act of a "supreme administrative body that carries out the management of the structures of the judiciary" - Decision № 8 of 15 September 1994 under c.d. № 9/94 (SG, issue 78 of 1994). From the point of view of its legal force, however, it differs significantly. The power of the president to appoint and dismiss the presidents of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court and the Prosecutor General on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council is isolated. This power is not tied to any participation of the President in the organization and functioning of the judiciary. While the president's involvement in the appointment and dismissal of ambassadors and generals is justified by his responsible functions in the field of international relations and defense, his power in the judiciary is largely symbolic.  

6.1. The president cannot refuse to issue a decree. For this reason, the repeated proposal under Art. 129, para 2, assoc. the last of the Constitution has a definitive, final character. It is absurd to claim that it is only of a preparatory nature and does not give rise to legal consequences. The President cannot refuse appointment or dismissal on a repeated proposal - the Constitution deprives him of any discretion in this case. The "can't refuse" formula is just a softer version of an explicit constitutional obligation . Failure to fulfill this obligation is a violation of the Constitution and is sanctioned with constitutional liability - Article 103, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.         

6.2. The president is constitutionally obliged. The Constitutional Court had the opportunity obiter dictum to establish the existence of such an obligation and the symbolic, prestigious nature of the presidential decree under Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. In Decision № 13 of 25 July 1996 under c.d. № 11/96 (SG, issue 66 of 1996) the court, considering the adoption of Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution in the Grand National Assembly, explicitly notes: “The idea of ​​appointing the chairmen of the SCC and SAC, as well as the Prosecutor General to be carried out by the President on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council, and to give the Presidential Decree above all a prestigious character - therefore, if the first time the President refuses for reasons of expediency, ie considered inappropriate the proposed candidacies, in case of a repeated proposal by the Supreme Judicial Council that he is obliged to issue a decree for appointment "(italics mine - T.T.).       

The president is therefore obliged to comply with the decision of the Supreme Judicial Council. In case of a second proposal, the signing of the decree is not a constitutional right, but a constitutional obligation of the president. Of course, this obligation cannot be guaranteed man u militari , but the lack of enforceability of the decision does not change its essence.    

7. There is no administrative act "in its own sense"

What has been said so far reveals the essence of the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution as acts of administration, issued within the constitutionally established competence of the respective bodies. Of course, this does not answer the question of whether these acts are administrative acts "in the proper sense". This type of qualification is a doctrinal abstraction, with no practical significance. The country's constitution and laws do not contain a general definition of the term "administrative act".

Indeed, Article 2 of the Administrative Procedure Act contains a definition, but as stated there, only for " individual administrative act" and only " within the meaning of this law ". This definition does not take precedence over the more general, generalizing language of the Constitution and does not exclude the constitutional admissibility of other administrative acts with other characteristics and under other laws.    

ІІ. Are the proposals subject to judicial review by the SAC even in cases where the President has issued a decree based on them?

8. The principle of art. 120, para 1

8.1. Not only administrative acts are subject to judicial review . The Constitution explicitly states that "Courts exercise control over the legality of acts and actions of administrative bodies" - Article 120, paragraph 1. This means that all acts are covered , regardless of their type and theoretical qualification - Ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus . With the development of the rule of law, the principle of judicial control over the administration is being applied more and more widely. Exceptions to this principle must therefore be interpreted and applied restrictively.     

8.2. The Constitution distinguishes between "acts of the administration" and "administrative acts" . An argument for this is the next paragraph of Article 120, according to which citizens and legal entities may appeal all administrative acts that affect them, except those explicitly specified in the law. Under Article 120 have used two different concepts - " acts of administrative bodies ... " (here may be covered solutions from different nature and contracts concluded by the administration) and " administrative acts " (as authoritative statements), apparently with different content. Therefore, the judicial control under Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is in principle admissible for all acts of the administration, including proposals, regardless of whether the latter can be defined as "administrative acts".             

By the way, in modern European law it is indisputable that the acts of the administration are not all and necessarily administrative acts ( Chapus, R., Droit administratif general, tome 1, 11e edition, Montchrestien, Paris, 1997, p.479 ).  

9. The Constitution allows exceptions

Undoubtedly, the specifics of the managerial activity, as well as the activity of other bodies of state power require in some cases the exclusion of certain categories of acts from judicial control. In Bulgarian administrative law, this possibility derives from the very wording of Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The non-articulated form of "acts" has been used, which makes it possible to exclude some of them by law . In this sense are the provisions of art. 34 ZAP and art. 7 ZVAS.  

10. The SAC is competent to interpret and apply the law

10.1. The legislator determines the scope of the appealed acts . In this sense, Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution should also be interpreted. According to him, "the Supreme Administrative Court rules on disputes over the legality of acts of the Council of Ministers and ministers, as well as other acts specified in the law." Let me remind you, as is evident from Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, not all acts of the Council of Ministers are subject to judicial review. The Constitution explicitly delegates the legislator to determine which acts of the Council of Ministers and which "other acts" are within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Administrative Court. Insofar as the competence is given to the latter, only he can determine whether and when the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution are subject to judicial control. Within the framework of the current legislation (Art. 5, items 1 and 2 of the SAA: "The Supreme Administrative Court hears appeals and protests against acts of the Council of Ministers", respectively "appeals and protests against decisions of the Supreme Judicial Council", see also Art. 34, para 1 and art. 92, para 2 JSA) only the administrative court can assess the scope of the legal norms. 

10.2. The scope of the exceptions is interpretable. This approach is determined by the variety and specificity of the issued acts and presupposes the granting of wider discretion to the law enforcement bodies in the concretization of the norms. For example, the language of Art. 7, item 2 of the Supreme Administrative Court, according to which "acts by which the foreign policy, defense and security of the country are implemented are not subject to consideration by the Supreme Administrative Court" (compare with Art. - "acts directly related to the defense and security of the country"), provides a fairly wide range of discretion of the court. Only he is competent to decide which acts should be excluded from judicial appeal, as this also applies to the proposals under Article 98, item 6 and Article 100, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. 

10.3. The existence of a legal interest is decided by the court. Only the SAC is competent to assess whether and when there is a legal interest in appealing the act. To what extent the practice adopted by him (see, for example, ref. 1552-1999-SAC, 5-member panel, Administrative Justice, 1999, № 2, p. 103) can be referred to the proposal under Article 129, paragraph 2 of The constitution or change is entirely his question, which he decides independently.   

11. On the constitutional distribution of competencies

11.1. The competence of the SAC is constitutionally established. It should be borne in mind that the competence of the SAC to rule on the legality of the acts of the Council of Ministers and other acts specified in the law is constitutionally established - Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The addressee of the norm is the Supreme Administrative Court, and the reference to "acts specified in the law" shows that the extension or narrowing of the scope of its competence is left to the legislator. 

11.2. The Constitutional Court should limit itself in the interpretation of Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It is inadmissible for him to limit the constitutionally established competence of the SAC by excluding by interpretation some or other acts of judicial control. This right is not given to him by the Constitution. In my opinion, from a substantive point of view, the Constitutional Court is the guardian of the principle of comprehensive judicial control against unjustified activity of the legislator - creator of exceptions. The spirit of constitutional justice must be geared to an ever-widening scope of judicial review of administrative acts in accordance with the rule of law.   

11.3. The competence of the Constitutional Court is only for constitutionality . From a procedural point of view, the Constitutional Court has its relatively clearly defined competence under Article 149 of the Constitution. This competence in relation to different categories of acts is, in principle, limited only to the examination of their constitutionality , but not to their legality. This is evident from the categorical provision of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution: the Constitutional Court rules on "a request to establish the unconstitutionality of laws and other acts of the National Assembly, as well as acts of the President".     

11.4. The Constitutional Court does not, in principle, control the legality of acts. Therefore, the Constitution clearly distinguishes the competence of the two bodies (Constitutional Court and SAC) in two directions: by means of controlled acts ( ratione materiae ); in line with the alleged vices. The Constitutional Court controls only acts of parliament and the president. He does not control acts of the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Judicial Council. The latter are within the competence only (Art. 92, para 2 JSA) of the Supreme Administrative Court. The Constitutional Court controls the constitutionality of acts of parliament and the president, but does not control their legality.     

12. On the conflict of competences

12.1. The constitutional framework is a source of conflict. The regulation, including in this case, shows that a conflict between the competences of the Constitutional Court and the SAC is possible. Such a conflict may arise initially as a conflict of interpretations (eg different interpretation of Article 125, paragraph 2 and / or Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution), manifest itself in a conflict of competences and end in a conflict of decisions. . 

12.2. In some cases, the Constitutional Court also checks the legality. In my opinion, when illegal proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution end with a decree of the President, the Constitutional Court shall rule on these decrees as a court on the facts. (if duly seised under Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution). Its competence also includes checking the legality of the proposals. The contradiction that exists between the understanding maintained here and the provision of Article 92, paragraph 2 of the JSA, according to which the SAC is the " only instance " competent to rule on the legality of acts of the Council of Ministers and the SJC, is only apparent. The legal norm cannot be opposed to the constitutional power to verify the constitutionality of the decree, and the latter necessarily includes a verification of the legality. A reverse understanding would narrow the control over constitutionality only until the signature of the president is checked, which is especially meaningless in the case of the repeated proposal of the SJC under Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.         

The question of the legality of the proposals is preliminary to the decree issued. The relations between the bodies of the executive and the judiciary, on the one hand, and the President, on the other hand, are constitutional in nature and their lawful implementation is a condition for their constitutionality . Therefore, in cases where the proposals are followed by a presidential decree and this decree is challenged before the Constitutional Court, the latter also rules on the legality of the proposals.    

13. On the applicable law

In its assessment of the constitutionality of the decrees, the Constitutional Court will be guided by the Constitution. It is not superfluous to add, however, that in assessing the legality of the proposals , respectively their validity, the court should be guided both by the laws in force in the country and by general and well-established principles of European constitutional and administrative law and justice. Their application (the principle of legality and presumption of validity of the act, the requirement for legal stability and the justified expectations of legal entities, the theory of the actual functionary and the external visibility of the act) eliminates the nullity of acts issued by an incompetent authority and ensures the smooth functioning of government. . The reasonable and state application of these principles is a mandatory element of both constitutional and administrative justice. Therefore, the incompetence of the incorrectly constituted SJC, for example, does not always mean that the acts issued by it are null and void. The Court has considerable discretion to apply those principles and to reject an application for annulment. The Constitutional Court also has such an opportunity in assessing the constitutionality of the issued decrees.      

14. Conclusion

For the reasons set out above, I consider that the operative part of the judgment in this case should read as follows:

“The proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution are acts of administrative bodies within the meaning of Art. 120, para 1 and Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution.

According to Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the range of acts subordinated to judicial control of the Council of Ministers and of the Supreme Judicial Council is determined by law. By virtue of Article 125, paragraph 1, the interpretation and application of the law is a constitutionally established competence of the SAC, which includes the assessment of legal interest in appealing an act followed by a presidential decree.

The decrees issued on the basis of the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution shall be subject to review for constitutionality before the Constitutional Court by the order of Art. 149, para .1, item 2 of the Constitution. When examining the constitutionality of decrees, the Constitutional Court is competent to also verify the legality of previous proposals, regardless of whether such verification has been made by another body before. "


Special opinion of Judge Rumen Yankov

The Constitutional Court was seised to interpret :

a) what is the legal nature of the provisions of Article 98, paragraph 6 and Article 100, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution in part to their more ' proposal of Ministers Council "and the provision of Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution in the part her " proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council " and

b) subject Do these proposals on judicial control of part of the SAC and in cases , in which the president already has issued a decree on the basis of them .

The appointment of those listed in the above texts officials person becomes a decision of the Council of Ministers or SCM, followed by presidential decree . On a common language both act , set in a specific sequence of time , the lawyers called complex factual composition , caused by joint competence .

In Article 98, pt. 6, Article 100, paragraph 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution is mentioned , that the president issued decrees on the appointment of a particular category of public entities on a proposal of the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Judicial Council. On the other hand , for the powers of the Council of Ministers have to be assumed by the content of article 114 of the Constitution : in execution of laws to adopt decrees , orders and decisions , and for the Supreme Judicial Council by Article 131 of the Constitution - solutions and proposals .

Human activity in this number and legal , is rational . The mind off to be accepted , that the personnel decisions of the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Judicial Council, which has to be followed by presidential decree , was taken by collective bodies themselves for him to , of aimlessly meeting for discussion of personnel matters . On the contrary , decisions are made in order to make a proposal to the president . The proposals are intrinsically inherent in the decisions , they are incorporated in them . The decision not can not be understood without motion and vice versa .

In the final account interpretation , which would have to be done in the first place is that the word " decision " and " offer " used in constitutional texts , no self- importance . They need to be seen in the linguistic sense ( grammatical and semantic ) generally , as an act of administrative authority , which is one component of the complex factual composition for appointment of officials persons of the President . This conclusion absolutely can not be done directly for the acts of the Supreme Judicial Council in Article 131 of the Constitution , which will be discussed below .

The decision on k.d . № 2/2002, in my opinion , was built on the wrong basis . Need is a short commentary on the wrong plays .

For the first prerequisite of the decision , the court is drawing the by definition of the doctrine of administrative act " as the supreme statement of administrative or other authorized body , made on the basis and in execution of the law , giving rise to immediate legal consequences , whose performance is affixed with legal coercion ."

The provision of Article 120, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution specifies , that the courts carry out control of legality of acts and actions of administrative authorities . Sees is , that she handled with the term " acts of the administration " in a broad sense . From this view point the working definition of the court " generation of immediate legal consequences , whose performance not is affixed with coercion " not able to be an attribute of all administrative acts . According to the hypothesis of Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, it is sufficient for them to be issued by authorized bodies in fulfillment of their constitutional obligations , which would cause changes in a foreign legal sphere . You need to be there in mind , that concept does not have to be interpreted restrictively , if it is hard , that Bulgaria is a constitutional state - Article 4, Paragraph 1.

Further , for to justify the conclusion you , that the proposals do not have administrative acts , the court began to seek arguments there , where not need . Thus, the decisions of the Council of Ministers or the SJC are defined as a non-independent act , different from the proposal, and the unified concept ( decision and proposal ) is broken down . From now on there is no something easier on the noun " proposal " to him be denied legal qualifications " administrative act ". It is defined only as a " preparatory action ".

In fact for the preparatory nature of the decision of the SJC can not be spoken in the presence of the provision of Article 131 of the Constitution , according to which decisions ( for appointment of ordinary magistrates ) and the proposals in Article 129, paragraph 2 is taken by secret ballot . Which preparatory action is taken by secret ballot , if not a solution in its own sense ?

What is refers to the third paragraph of the operative part of the interpretative decision , I believe , that with it , the court has created a new constitutional norm . With pompously phraseology , gathered in one sentence ' legal and national security , the international prestige of the Republic of Bulgaria and extremely important public functions ... "is worded ban YOU to exercise constitutional your power in Article 125 of the Basic Law to examine administrative acts . Obviously for the Constitutional Court, the absence of judicial review is a guarantee of legal certainty .

Moreover interpretative decision in this way does not hold up , that in the country's state power is divided in legislative , executive and judicial - Article 8 of the Constitution ; that it implemented supreme supervision for precise and equal application of the laws in administrative justice and that assess the legality of acts of the Council of Ministers as and of other acts , set out in law - Article 125 of the Constitution .

Insofar need to be proposed interpretation , I think , that it should be is with the following content :

The proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution within the meaning of Art. 120, para 1 and Art. 125, para 2 are administrative acts .

SAC by virtue of Article 125, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution interpret and apply the law and assess whether it is there legal interest to be appealed act , followed by presidential decree .

The decrees , issued on the basis of the proposals in Article 98, item 6, Article 100, paragraph 1, item 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution , subject to the control of constitutionality by the Constitutional Court , which has the power to check and legality of the preceding them proposals , regardless of whether such verification is done by the judicial authority before it .

 
Opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov

In Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5 of the Law on Protection of Classified Information

The wording of the provision does not specify whether the register provided for in it is public or not .

The first paragraph of the provision provides , that will be leading a register of materials and documents , containing classified information , constituting state or official secret . In this his part provision sets for what will be leading the register , but not its content . The last one is exhaustively stated in the second paragraph of the same Article 35 ZZKI.Sashtestvuvaneto of two paragraphs is an indicator , that each of them has different subject of legal regulation . The nature of the register is determined by its content and not by the occasion and purpose for creating it . The register contains data on the circumstances exhaustively listed in paragraph 2 of Article 35 of the CIPA . Neither one of them not been included in the list of categories of information , subject to qualification as a state secret ( application № 1 to Article 25 CIPA). Once the register does not contain data , representing state secret , he is not able to be secret , but public .

This understanding is expressed and presented in the case opinions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and of National Service " Security ", ie . the state institutions , which have a direct relation to the application of CIPA and in particular of its art. 35, para 1 and 5.

 
Opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

On the grounds of art. 35, para 1 and 5 of CIPA

I signed the operative part of the decision on Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5 of the CIPA, because I accept that it does not contradict the Constitution, as it does not state that the register, which is intended to be kept by the State Commission on Information Security, is not is public but secret. However, I do not agree with the reasons for the decision of the Constitutional Court on this issue, which assume that the register is confidential.

My considerations are the following:

Article 35, paragraph 1 of the CIPA does not state whether the register of materials and documents containing classified information constituting a state or official secret, which must be kept by the SCIS, is public or secret. Paragraph 5 of the same text stipulates that “the procedure for submitting data for entry in the register, as well as the conditions and the procedure for making inquiries from it shall be determined in the regulations for application of law”. It cannot be inferred from that provision that the register is not public, as the applicants claim. A state secret according to Article 25 of the CIPA is the information specified in the list under Annex №1 to Article 25 of the CIPA. Documents, information and data outside this list do not constitute a state secret. Whether the register under Art. 35, para 1 constitutes a state or official secret and should therefore be classified as secret, depends on the data it must contain. Article 35, paragraph 2 of the CIPA lists them. None of them may fall under any of the items in the list of categories of information subject to classification as a state secret, nor disclose an official secret. This also applies to Section II, item 20 of this list, where the information “about the organization, methods and means serving for protection of the classified information, representing a state secret” is indicated. Art. 25 of the list regarding electronic registers, diaries for registration of documents, because none of the content of the register, indicated in art. 35, para 2 of CIPA, is classified as information constituting a state secret. In this sense are the opinions of the Minister of Interior and the National Security Service.

Article 35, paragraph 2 of the CIPA indicates what the register under paragraph 1 contains. It can show which is the organizational unit that issued the material or document, when it was created and when the classification level should be removed, the legal basis for the classification with the security seal or that the security level has been terminated or removed. None of these indications may provide information about the organization itself, about the methods and means used to protect classified information that is a state or official secret. This cannot be seen from the identification number of the material or the document under which it appears in the register (Article 35, paragraph 2, item 3 of the CIPA). There is nothing behind the identification number that can reveal exactly what material or document is in question, or what its content is. If, however, the legislator considered that the identification number contained any secret data, he should have included it in the list under Annex № 1 to Article 25 of the CIPA.

In the regulations for its application provided for in Article 35, paragraph 5 of the CIPA, it is not possible to supplement the list under Annex № 1 to Article 25 of the law, including the register provided for in Article 35, paragraph 1 or a separate point of it, nor to declare its secrecy. The list has the rank of a law because it is an annex to an article of the law and changes in it can only be made by law. The regulations may not classify documents and materials that the law itself has not declared secret.

However, the non-disclosure of the register does not lead to the conclusion that it is secret. If the CIPA stated that the register was secret, then this would be contrary to Article 41 of the Constitution, as it does not contain, as already mentioned, any state or official secret. This would prevent interested public organizations and citizens from checking whether the declassification deadlines are met, whether there are changes to the secrecy period, as well as whether the materials are available or destroyed. Without being aware of this, the right provided for in Article 33, paragraph 5 of the CIPA to appeal to the SAC against the decision of the SCIS for destruction of information could not be used. And this would contradict in essence the real possibility for exercising the right under art. 120, para 2 of the Constitution.

It follows that the failure to state explicitly in Article 35, paragraph 1 of the CIPA that the register is public is not in violation of either Article 41 or Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The same applies to the allegation of unconstitutionality of Article 35, paragraph 5 of the CIPA, which stipulates that regulations will determine the procedure for providing data for entry in the register, as well as the conditions for the procedure for making inquiries from it. If the regulations would deny access to information in the register, which would practically be classified, then it would be contrary to the CIPA.

For these reasons, and not for the reasons indicated in the reasons for the decision, there is no reason to respect the request for establishing the unconstitutionality of Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5 of the CIPA.

JUDGMENT № 3
Sofia, 25 September 2002 constitutional cases № 11/2002 Judge-Rapporteur Vasil Gotsev (Promulgated, SG No. 94 of 4 October 2002) 



Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev - Rapporteur, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted at the request of 57 MPs from the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5; Article 43, paragraph 5; Article 57, paragraph 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; 88, para 2 and art. 109 of the Law for protection of the classified information (CIPA), promulgated, SG, issue 45 / 30.04.2002, as well as of § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the same law .

And

1. At the beginning of the request, considerations are set out against § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the Classified Information Act (CLRAIP), which is alleged to be contrary to the provisions of Article 41 and Article 57, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. With the repeal of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (SDBDSBRUGST) (promulgated, SG, issue 63/97, amended and supplemented, issue 89/97, No. 69/99, No. 24/2001, No. 52/2001), which enacts § 37 of the PHCIP, violates the fundamental right of citizens guaranteed by the Constitution (Art. 41) to seek and receive information, approved by a number of international acts to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party.

2. It is alleged that as it is not indicated in Art. 35, para 1 and 5 of the CIPA that the register to be kept by the State Commission on Information Security (SCIS) for the materials and documents containing classified information, representing state or official secret, and with art. 35, para 5 of CIPA it is provided to the regulations to settle the conditions and the order for inquiries from the register, the right of the citizens to be informed is also violated. The lack of information did not give them the opportunity to exercise their right under Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution to appeal against the administrative acts that affect them.

3. It is maintained that Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA contradicts Article 48 of the Constitution, as it restricts the right to work. The text was also inconsistent with Convention No. 111 of 1958 on Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation, to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party (ratified by Decree № 205/60 of the Presidium of the National Assembly, promulgated, Izvestia). No. 46/60) and with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (promulgated, SG No. 80/92 , amended, SG No. 137/98). The unforeseen procedure for judicial protection also violated Article 56 of the Constitution.

4. In contradiction with art. 120, para 2 of the Constitution it is indicated that the provisions of art. 57, para 5 are also; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; 88, para 2 and art. 109 CIPA, which exclude the right to appeal against the administrative acts, related to access, termination and refusal of access to classified information. This also infringes the right to protection of the persons to whom the relevant acts relate.

The statement of the applicants also contains arguments for contradiction of the cited provisions with the indicated international acts and conventions to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party. However, the request is based only on Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution and the Constitutional Court is not required to rule on the basis of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 4 of the Constitution on the conformity of the attacked texts of the CIPA. with some of the norms of international law or with international treaties to which Bulgaria is a party. According to Article 22, paragraph 1 of the Constitutional Court Act, the court is not limited by the stated ground for non-compliance with the Constitution. However, he may rule only on the requests, specifically indicated in some of the points of art. 149, para 1. This is what motivates the ruling of the Constitutional Court to allow for consideration only the requests that are based on contradictions with the Constitution.

ІІ

By its ruling of 25 June 2002, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution. The following parties have been constituted as interested parties in the case: the National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General, the National Intelligence Service, the State Security Service, the State Security Service. archive, the Human Rights Committee, the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after September 9, 1944, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Truth Union, the Access to Information Program Foundation and the Bulgarian League for Human Rights.

Pursuant to the opportunity provided by the Constitutional Court, only the National Assembly gave opinions on the request, stating that the opinion had been adopted by the Committee on Internal Security and Public Order, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the National Intelligence Service. , National Security Service, General Directorate of Archives at the Council of Ministers, Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, Access to Information Program, Bulgarian League for Human Rights, Supreme Administrative Court and the Human Rights Committee.

An additional statement in support of the request was received by the representative of the group of MPs who referred to the Constitutional Court.

The National Assembly has indicated that the Committee on Internal Security and Public Order at the second vote of the CIPA thoroughly discussed the texts subject to the request to the Constitutional Court and considered them to be in compliance with the Constitution. She discussed the arguments in the request of the group of MPs and stated that she retained her opinion under Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5; Article 43, paragraph 5; Article 57, paragraph 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; 88, para 2 and art. 109 CIPA and provides the Constitutional Court to rule on the dispute. The opinion does not say anything about § 37 of the CRPD.

The Council of Ministers maintains that the request of the group of MPs is unfounded and should be rejected. The detailed argumentation maintains that Article 41 of the Constitution is irrelevant to § 37 of the CIPA and does not infringe the constitutional right to information. This is according to the Council of Ministers, because there is no constitutional provision requiring the explicit adoption of a law on the conditions for the order and access to the documents of the former State Security and the former RFBH. The access to information regarding these documents will be carried out according to the order and under the conditions of other current laws - the Law for access to public information (APIA), promulgated, SG, issue 55/2000, amended, issue 1/2002 and the Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA), promulgated, SG, issue 1/2002. If some of them contain unconstitutional restrictions on the right to seek and receive the relevant information, they are what should be to challenge.

Regarding Art. 35, para 1 and 5 of the CIPA, the Council of Ministers considers that the non-indication in the text that the register is public does not mean that the citizens do not have access to it. The terms and conditions for this would be regulated in the envisaged regulations, which should be in compliance with the CIPA, the APIA, the LPPD.

Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA did not restrict the right to work. According to the opinion, the constitutional right to work is not the right to hold any position.

Regarding the revoked right to judicial appeal of acts for refusal, termination and revocation of access to documents and materials classified as state and official secret in art. 57, para 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; Article 88, paragraph 2 and Article 109 of the CIPA states that such a restriction is provided for in Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It is designed to guarantee and comply with the public interest in the protection of classified information.

The Minister of the Interior also finds the request to the Constitutional Court unfounded. According to him, in the register under Art.

35, para 1 of CIPA will not contain information included in the list of categories of information, representing classified information. He believes that the publicity of the register is legally guaranteed by the provided procedure for access to the register.

According to him, Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA does not contradict the guaranteed constitutional right to work, which is not absolute.

In connection with the alleged violation by the applicants of Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution with the texts of the CIPA, which exclude judicial appeal of acts of refusal, termination and deprivation of access to classified information, the opinion states that the restriction is in accordance with art. 120, para 2 of the Constitution, because it is dictated by interests of the national security.

The opinion does not contain any considerations in relation to § 37 of the PHCIP. The text is mentioned only in the series of articles related to the revocation of the right to appeal, although it does not mention this.

According to the Minister of Defense, the register under Article 35 of the CIPA should not be public, because the data it contains (listed in Article 35, paragraph 2 of the CIPA) are directly related to national security.

The opinion states that this case does not concern the restriction of the right to work, and that it is not absolute.

In accordance with Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, according to the same are the restrictions in connection with the right to judicial appeal in the texts of CIPA, which are attacked before the Constitutional Court.

The Minister of Defense does not take a stand on the occasion of the repeal of the Law on Defense of the Republic of Bulgaria with § 37 of the CIPA.

The opinion of the National Intelligence Service maintains that § 37 of the Law on Intelligence does not violate the Constitution, but repeals only “one law, the public need of which has disappeared”.

It was correct for Article 35, paragraph 5 of the CIPA to refer to regulations, because it contains "a number of data on which foreign special services could perform analyzes and acquire intelligence information." This would threaten national security. For the remaining texts of the CIPA, which are attacked by the petitioners, the opinion leaves it to the Constitutional Court to assess.

The National Security Service believes that the disputed provisions of the CIPA do not contradict the Constitution.

The fact that Article 35, paragraph 1 of the CIPA does not state that the register is public does not mean that this is not the case. According to the opinion, the data in it do not correspond to the classified information determined by the CIPA. Therefore, although not explicitly stated, the register is public.

Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA did not violate the right to work, as the citizen himself, who requested to be examined for access to classified information in connection with a certain job, withdrew his request. The stated one-year ban on re-applying is to prevent possible abuses of rights.

Regarding the limited right to judicial appeal in the attacked articles of the CIPA, the opinion maintains that Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution gives the right to do so, as they were made in the interest of national security. An administrative appeal to the SCIS was also envisaged.

No arguments have been made in support of § 37 of the CRPD.

The opinion of the General Directorate of Archives at the Council of Ministers states that the CIPA was not agreed with him. The activity of the department is described, indicating that the documents in the Central Military Archive are used with the consent of the Minister of Defense. The use of confidential documents from the State Archive Fund is carried out in compliance with the requirements of the Ordinance on the activities of the National Security Service to ensure the protection of strategic sites and activities and protection of state secrets in the Republic of Bulgaria, and a list of facts, information and objects. which constitute a state secret of the Republic of Bulgaria.

It is pointed out that the establishment of the unconstitutionality of Articles 35, para. 1 and 5; 43, para 5; 57, para 5; 59, para 5; 60, para 5; 68, 69, 88, para 2 and 109 of the CIPA are not within the competence of the department. There is no opinion under § 37 PZRZZKI.

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee rules only on the texts of the CIPA, which are related to the exclusion of the right to appeal. According to him, they are unconstitutional because they contradict Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

The opinion of the Access to Information Program takes into account only § 37 of the PHCIP and Article 35 of the same law.

In connection with § 37 of the PCPCPC, the possibility is considered for the Constitutional Court to rule on the unconstitutionality of repealing norms in law. It is assumed that this is possible, as it is necessary to examine the repealed norm. According to the Access to Information Program, § 37 of the PHCIPC contradicts Article 41, paragraph 1 and Article 32, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It blocked the way to obtain information that the APIA cannot provide. There was no other law by which it could be obtained. The opportunity of the citizens to check who violated their rights under Article 32, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, which also referred to the time before its adoption, was also taken away.

The opinion maintains that it contradicts the Constitution and Article 35 of the CIPA regarding the register. Accordingly, the fact that it is not expressly stated that it is not public does not guarantee that access to the information it contains will not be restricted.

The Supreme Administrative Court shall dwell only on the provisions of Article 57, paragraph 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; Article 88, paragraph 2 and Article 109 of the CIPA. According to him, they affect the basic constitutional rights of citizens and contradict the Constitution.

The Human Rights Committee shall consider only Article 57, paragraph 5; 59, para 5; 60, para 5; 68; 69; 88, para 2 and 109 of CIPA and under § 37 of the TFP of the same law.

It is maintained that the repeal of the SDBSA is not unconstitutional, as the Constitution does not provide for a law to repeal it. At the same time, this law affected "foreign rights".

The opinion of the Committee regarding the above-mentioned provisions of the CIPA, which it commented on, is that they have “perversely” exercised the right of the legislator to limit the possibility for judicial appeal of certain administrative acts, which violates Article 120 of the Constitution. .

The Bulgarian League for Human Rights accepts that the request to declare the provisions of the Act mentioned in it unconstitutional is fully justified. According to her, it also contained allegations of contradiction with international treaties to which Bulgaria was a party, which should have been taken into account by the Constitutional Court, although there was no explicit reference to Article 149, paragraph 1, item 4 of the Constitution.

The additional opinion of the applicants maintains again that the disputed provisions of the CIPA contradict the respective texts of the Constitution.

III

Having considered the arguments and considerations of the petitioners and the opinions of the constituted as interested parties, the Constitutional Court accepted the following:

1. On the request for establishing unconstitutionality of art. 35, para 1 and 5 of CIPA

The request is unfounded. Insofar as there is no constitutionally protected right of citizens and legal entities to access classified information, there is no right of access to the register in which the materials and documents containing classified information are described. The register under Art. 35, para 1 of CIPA shall be established in order to serve the activity of the persons under Art. 3, para 2 of CIPA, whose "official duties or specifically assigned task" require access to classified information and who have received permission for such access and in particular to the persons under art. 31, para 1 of CIPA. In this sense, the register has an official character. It is not intended to inform citizens, for example, about the creation of a document containing classified information - Article 35, paragraph 2, item 1 of the CIPA. The main purpose of the register is to systematize the archival units and to allow the ex officio persons, as well as those with authorized access under the conditions of a huge information array to fulfill their obligations under the law. The analysis of Article 41 of the Constitution shows that only the legislator is competent to assess whether the information entered in the register is of public importance, respectively whether to provide access to it by law. This applies to any information, and even more so to information that relates to national security. There is no constitutional obligation for the legislator to provide public access to the register, therefore the request should be rejected.

For the same reasons, in view of the regulated matter, there are no constitutional obstacles that exclude the right of the legislator to delegate the specific regulation for work with the register of the regulations for application of the law.

2. On the request for establishing unconstitutionality of art. 43, para 5

The provision does not contradict the Constitution. According to Article 43, paragraph 2 of the CIPA, the reliability investigation procedure for issuing a decision for access to classified information shall be carried out after the written consent of the person to be examined. This consent may be withdrawn at any time during the investigation procedure (Article 43, paragraph 4 of the CIPA). The attacked before the Constitutional Court para 5 of art. 43 CIPA establishes that the person who withdrew his written consent for investigation has no right for a period of one year to re-apply for a position or to perform a specific task related to work with classified information.

According to the applicants, this violated Article 48 and Article 56 of the Constitution. On the one hand, it constituted a violation of the right to work (Article 48 K), and on the other hand, it also violated the right to protection (Article 56 K). It was also contrary to Convention № 111 on Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation of 4 June 1958. Decision № 2/99 on c.d. № 33/98 (promulgated, SG No. 8/99), to which the Constitutional Court has declared unconstitutional and inconsistent with international treaties to which Bulgaria is a party, § 1 of the transitional and final provisions of the Act for the administration (PZRZA) (promulgated, SG, issue 130/98).

There is a fundamental difference between the text of § 1 of the TFPA and Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA. Therefore, the judgments of the Constitutional Court in the decision, to which the applicants refer, are irrelevant to it. The norm of § 1 PZRZA is lustration. It restricts the right of certain categories of persons to hold senior positions in the administration because they have held senior positions or equated to them in the political and administrative apparatus of the Bulgarian Communist Party or have been collaborators of the former State Security in any category specified in ZDDBDS (before the amendment of the law from 2001). The Constitutional Court has ruled that this restriction is unconstitutional and inconsistent with international treaties to which Bulgaria is a party.

However, Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA refers to something else. It does not terminate employment relationships based on political criteria, as the Constitutional Court had in mind in the cited decision, but addresses the issue of applying for a person to hold a certain position or perform a certain activity, which he himself has given up. The withdrawal of written consent to conduct a reliability study in relation to the handling of classified information may be for various reasons. They can move within the reluctance of the person to be assigned to him and to perform certain work, to the reluctance of the inspection to reveal circumstances and facts about his personality. In both cases, however, it was not the rule of law that limited his right to work, but his own decision. However, the dignity and good name of the withdrawer are not impaired, since he himself has determined that the work with classified information is not suitable for him. Of course, this does not prevent any other job from working according to their qualifications. The restriction is for a period of one year. The envisaged one-year period during which the person cannot repeat his / her request for an access survey is also a barrier to abuse of rights. The right to work under Article 48 of the Constitution does not mean that everyone can work any job, regardless of their qualifications. According to Decision № 18/97 of the Constitutional Court (promulgated, SG No. 110/97), it is not absolute and “subject to various restrictions of an objective and subjective nature”. Reliability for access to classified information is also a type of specific qualification that is related to the national interests of the country. Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA does not concern an initial restriction on employment, as referred to in Convention № 111/1958, but an arbitrary withdrawal of a request for research necessary for work with classified information. . The provision was created for national security reasons. In support of Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA, an argument can be drawn from Article 4 of the cited Convention. According to him, "measures that affect a person who is subject to a legitimate suspicion that he is engaged in activities that harm the security of the state are not considered discriminatory." It is characteristic that we are talking not only about established facts, which is further stated in Article 14 of the Convention, but even only about "suspicion".

In Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA there is also no room for interference with the constitutional right to protection (Article 56 K), as here the will to withdraw the given consent for investigation belongs to the one who initially gave it. He has nothing to defend himself against.

In view of the above, the request to establish that Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA contradicts Article 48 and Article 56 of the Constitution is unfounded.

3. On the request for establishing the unconstitutionality of art. 57, para 5, art. 59, para 5, art. 60, para 5, art. 68, art. 69, art. 88, para 2 and art. .109 of the CIPA

All these provisions concern the exclusion of the right to appeal against the refusal to grant permission for access to classified information, its termination or revocation by the relevant authorities. The claim of the applicants is that they contradict Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. There is also a Decision по 8/99 on c.d. № 4/99 of the Constitutional Court (promulgated, SG, issue 47/99).

According to Article 57, paragraph 1 of the CIPA, the issuance of permission for access to classified information of the respective level is refused when in the course of the investigation it is established that the researched does not meet some of the requirements under Article 40, paragraph 1 of the CIPA or knowingly has submitted incorrect or incomplete data. The text exhaustively lists the conditions for issuing a permit. Article 41 and Article 42 of the CIPA clarify the concept of “reliability” of surveys, which is one of the conditions specified in Article 40, paragraph 1.

Article 58 of the CIPA states what the permit and the possible refusal must contain. Item 6 of the same article states that the legal basis for the issuance or refusal to grant permission must also be mentioned. Article 60, paragraph 1 of the CIPA lists the cases in which the body that issued the permit may terminate it. Upon termination, Article 58 of the CIPA shall apply.

When issuing, terminating and revoking a permit for access to classified information regarding cryptographic security, Article 88, paragraph 2 of the CIPA refers to the conditions of Chapter Five of the Law, which contains all the above rules.

For the protection of industrial security, Art. 96 and Art. 97 of the CIPA provide for specific but listed rules for issuing and refusing a permit. According to Article 103, paragraph 3 of the CIPA, the refusal is not motivated. According to Article 104, paragraph 1, item 3, the legal basis shall be indicated in the permit and the refusal.

The Articles 57, para 5, 59, para 5, 60, para 5, 88, para 2 and 109 of the Law on the Protection of Classified Information attacked by the applicants state that the decisions of the respective bodies for refusal, termination and deprivation of access is not subject to appeal in court. Article 109 of the CIPA states that they may be appealed under Articles 62-68 of the CIPA. Article 62 of the same law stipulates that the refusal, termination and revocation of a permit may be appealed to the SCIS by the interested parties. The following provisions govern the procedure. A special procedure for administrative appeal is created.

Article 68 of the CIPA stipulates that after the completion of this procedure the decision of the SCIS is final and “not subject to any appeal”.

The refusal, termination and revocation of permits issued by SCIS is also not subject to appeal under Article 69 of the CIPA.

The issue of appealing the above-mentioned acts related to classified information is not unambiguously resolved in the relevant laws of the member states or candidates for NATO membership. In some cases, judicial control is allowed, while in others various forms of administrative control are provided.

In a series of decisions - № 7/95 on c.d. № 9/95 (promulgated, SG, issue 59/95, amended, issue 60/99), № 21/95 under c.d. № 18/95 (promulgated, SG, issue 99/95), № 18/97 under c.d. № 12/97 (promulgated, SG, issue 110/97), № 4/99 under c.d. № 31/98 (promulgated, SG No. 33/99), the Constitutional Court accepted, “that judicial control over administrative acts is a constitutive element of the rule of law” (Decision № 13/93 under Art. d. № 13/93, promulgated, SG, issue 65/93) and the access to it must be open at the beginning.

However, taking into account “the great importance for the democratic and legal state of the general law for judicial control introduced by the current Constitution for legality of administrative acts (Art. 120, para 2 K)” and that with the exclusion of some administrative acts from the scope of judicial control on the grounds of Art. 120, para 2 shall not be abused (Decision № 8/99 under Code of Civil Procedure № 4/99, promulgated, SG, issue 47/99), the Constitutional Court has come to the conclusion that the exception is provided only when “another more important, but explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be protected as a matter of priority” before the constitutionally recognized fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens. Such a value is stated, for example, in the field of national security.

The series of decisions mentioned above, which affirm the right of judicial control over administrative acts, does not address the issue of national security and whether it or another constitutional value should be preferred. This is precisely the question raised in the disputed provisions of the CIPA. It should be borne in mind that there is no constitutionally guaranteed right of access to classified information, which is protected by the accessory right to appeal. Insofar as in this case we can speak of a "right of access" in the sense of a subjective right, it is created by virtue of the law, it is granted only to certain persons (Art. 42 of the CIPA) and after the completion of a legal procedure (Articles 43-69 of the CIPA). As a rule, this is a power as a condition for an activity related to access to classified information. In this sense, it is not only a right but also an obligation for the person concerned (for example, for employees in various services related to defense or internal affairs). Only the assessment of the body that issues the relevant acts is authoritative for the emergence of this power, and their issuance is not motivated - a situation that is not disputed by the applicants. This assessment cannot be replaced by a court judgment. 

The right of the legislator to exclude by law certain administrative acts from judicial appeal is not disputed by the Constitutional Court. In Decision № 18/97 on c.d. № 12/97 (promulgated, SG No. 110/97) he has explicitly stated that since the Constitution does not contain criteria to make this power of the National Assembly conditional, the issue is “in the sphere of of legislative competence ”.

When considering the request of the group of MPs in the present case, it should be pointed out that when the refusal, termination and revocation of the access permit have not been granted by the SCIS, they are not out of control. Article 62 of the CIPA allows them to be appealed administratively before the SCIS. The latter is the one who has the right to a final decision. The State Commission on Information Security according to Article 4, paragraph 1 of the CIPA is a state body that implements the policy of the Republic of Bulgaria for the protection of classified information. According to Article 6, paragraph 1 of the same law, its members are determined by a decision of the Council of Ministers. It follows that it is administratively independent of the structures of the Ministry of Interior. Its activity, structure and organization of work are determined by structural regulations adopted by the Council of Ministers (Article 5 of CIPA). In connection with this situation, Article 69 excludes from any appeal when the refusal, termination or revocation of a permit for classified information is given by her.

The legislator has accepted this due to the need to keep the actual secrecy of the relevant information, which is necessary from the point of view of national security.

The limitations of the judicial appeal are related to the work with classified materials, access to which may directly affect national security. Disclosure of sources and data that have led specialized bodies to refuse, suspend or revoke an authorization also affects security interests. On the other hand, the right to work is not encroached upon here (Article 48 K), as it is a question of a certain quality of the person, the existence of “reliability” within the meaning of the CIPA, without which he would not be able to carry out a certain activity. The constitutional right to work is not absolute (Decision of the Constitutional Court № 18/97, promulgated, SG, issue 110/97). Performing one job or another is often associated with a specific qualification that is required. Without it, the relevant position cannot be held. The employer has the right to assess the presence or absence of certain qualities that are necessary in a given area. In Decision № 2/99 on c.d. № 33/98 (promulgated, SG No. 8/99) The Constitutional Court has ruled that the restriction of the right to work should not be based on criteria that contradict the Constitution.

In this case, the denial, termination or revocation of access to classified information is made on the basis of constitutionally protected criteria - the interests of national security.

National security is set out in Chapter One - "Basic Principles" of the Constitution. Constitutionally, national security is guaranteed by the armed forces (Article 9 K). At the same time, Article 24, paragraph 2 of the Constitution indicates that one of the main goals of the foreign policy of the Republic of Bulgaria is national security.

The cases in which the specialized security bodies rule for protection of the classified information for state or official secret by refusing, terminating or revoking a permit for access to it are undoubtedly among the few in which the restriction of judicial control over the administrative acts is justified according to art. .120, para 2 of the Constitution. The legislator had in mind the exclusively confidential nature of the information in connection with which the above-mentioned acts were issued. The disclosure of themselves and of the sources through which they were collected, without which the proceedings in a trial could not take place, could endanger national security.

Article 35, para 1, art. 37, para 2 and art. 44, para 2 of the Constitution create restrictions on some of the basic rights of citizens proclaimed in it, such as choice of residence, movement in the country and its departure, freedom of conscience and religion and the right of association when it is in the interest of national security. The legislator has preferred the basic personal rights of citizens and the interests of national security, which affect the whole society. A constitutional value that is more significant is protected.

Therefore, Art. 57, para 5, Art. 59, para 5, Art. 60, para 5, Art. 68, Art. 69, Art. 88, para 2 and Art. 109 of the CIPA do not contradict the Constitution. .

4. The request to establish the unconstitutionality of § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the Classified Information Protection Act

A majority of votes was not cast in the vote on whether § 37 of the CIPAA contradicts the Constitution. Therefore, the request of the MPs must be rejected. The lack of a majority for either of these prevents the court from drawing up general reasons for the decision in this part. Therefore, the opinions of the two groups of constitutional judges are presented separately.

According to Judges Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Rumen Yankov and Penka Tomcheva, the request must be rejected on the following grounds:

The impugned provision repeals the Law on Access to Documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff. According to the petitioners, the repeal of the law violates the right to information and is therefore unconstitutional.

The request is unfounded. The right of the legislator to repeal laws has so far not been challenged in any of the legal systems known to the court. The explicit repeal of a law is a basic and universally recognized way to terminate the effect of legal norms for reasons of legislative expediency. This right is explicitly stated in Article 84, item 1 of the Bulgarian Constitution.

It is doubtful in principle to what extent the annulment norm can be subject to constitutional review on the merits, insofar as its disposition has no content of its own other than a simple act of annulment. To recognize the right of the court to assess the need for already repealed laws, the existence of which is not explicitly provided for in the Constitution, means to recognize its function as a positive legislator , something inadmissible under any legal system. The need for the existence of a law that is not explicitly prescribed by the Constitution (see § 3, para. 3 of the transitional and final provisions of the Constitution) is a political issue and its resolution is within the competence of this body, which expresses the will of the politically formed majority in compliance with democratic procedures, ie - the National Assembly. According to Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the court is competent to rule only on adopted laws, but not to prescribe the adoption (existence) of specific laws. Only the parliament is sovereign to decide which categories of public relations should be regulated by a separate law, as well as the action at the time of such a law, as a rule constitutional. The court does not have such competence under the Constitution and it cannot appropriate it in this case either.  

The fact that the repealed law has passed a constitutional review is irrelevant in this case. It is pointless to mix two radically different issues - a) whether the repealed law was in conformity with the Constitution, an issue on which only the Constitutional Court has jurisdiction, and b) whether the existence of this law is still necessary and what considerations for legislative expediency justify its preservation or repeal, a matter of the exclusive competence of the National Assembly. The Constitution in Article 84, item 1 does not restrict the legislator with a requirement for repeal only of unconstitutional laws. As a rule, the National Assembly repeals laws that are constitutionally compliant.

In this line of thought, it should be noted that it is also pointless to draw arguments from the compliance of the repeal with other existing laws and the possible contradictions between them. The Constitutional Court only verifies the conformity of the disputed norm with the Constitution. He does not check the compliance or non-compliance of this repeal with other laws. The possible inconsistency between different legal norms can be a ground for unconstitutionality only in the cases when this inconsistency leads to violation of constitutional principles and norms. In all other cases, such inconsistency is a problem of legislative improvement and can be overcome by subsequent legislation.

On the other hand, in order to maintain the thesis that the repeal of a law leads to unconstitutionality due to the revocation of acquired rights, it must be proved that these rights are constitutionally protected. This will be the case when the legislative protection of fundamental constitutional rights, such as the right to life or the right to property, is repealed. In other cases, the abolition of legislative protection is obviously not a violation of the Constitution, but a matter of legislative expediency - for example, in the decriminalization of certain acts.

It was in this case that the existence of a constitutional right affected by the annulment was not proved. The allegation of the petitioners that the disputed norm violates Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is due to ignorance of the constitutional norm. Article 41, paragraph 1, sentence 1, which states that "Everyone has the right to seek, receive and impart information", regulates the so-called freedom of information. The basic essence of this freedom comes down to the prohibition of the state to restrict the free exchange of information in a democratically organized society. Freedom of information guarantees the free formation (Article 39 of the Constitution) and the expression of one's own opinion (Article 40 of the Constitution) and is an element of this fundamental right. To the extent that freedom of information may include any obligation on public authorities to provide such information, it does not apply to all or any information available to the State.      

In its interpretative decision, the Constitutional Court clarified the meaning of this norm in the system of communication rights. In the operative part of Decision № 7 of 4 June 1996 under c.d. № 1/96 (promulgated, SG No. 55/1996) the court has ruled that “The right to seek and receive information under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution covers the obligation of state bodies to provide access to public information. The content of this obligation is subject to legislative determination ". The Constitutional Court makes the clarification due to the necessity, and in a huge number of hypotheses also due to the practical impossibility to refer this obligation to any information. The reasoning of the decision also explicitly states that "the legislator is the one who, in view of the meaning of the constitutional order, must identify the variety of hypotheses in which the obligation is subject to explicit formulation". Therefore, the content of the obligation is not absolute. It is always defined in a law - an entire special law (for example, the Law on Access to Public Information - promulgated, SG, issue 55 of 2000) or separate provisions in a more general law (for example, Article 9 of the Law on Protection of Public Information). the environment - promulgated, SG No. 86/1991, amended, SG No. 26/2001).      

By the way, this is the position of the European Court of Human Rights. In its case law on the application of Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (promulgated, SG No. 80/1992, amended, SG No. 137/1998), the European Court of Justice shall explicitly noted that "Article 10 does not give the person the right to access a register which contains information about his personal situation, nor does it provide for an obligation for the government to provide such information" - (Leander judgment of 26 March 1987). The judgment in the Gaskin case of 7 July 1989, in which the applicant was denied access to his file from the period when he was a minor, is also explicit in this sense. In both cases, the court explicitly adopted the rule that the freedom of information under Article 10 of the ECHR applies only to the prohibition on the authorities from obstructing the receipt of information that other entities wish or may agree to disclose - "la liberte de recevoire des informations (…) Interdit essentially in a government of the emperor as to the reception of information that other authors may or may not consent to "fournir" (serie A n. 116, p. 28, para. 74; serie A, n. 160, § 21, para 52 ).    

In both decisions, the so-called negative aspect of freedom of information can be traced. The European Court denies that there is an obligation for the state to provide information, whether classified or not. The European regulation is an improved version of the original regulation of the freedom of information in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (promulgated, SG, issue 43 of 1976). According to Article 19, item 2 of the Covenant "Everyone has the right to freedom of expression; this right includes freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds…" However, this freedom does not create an obligation for the State to provide access to information stored by it. To the extent that it can be argued that freedom of speech involves an obligation on the authorities to provide information of public interest, notwithstanding theoretical disputes, the case law of the European Court of Justice is firmly based on the principle that only national legislators have jurisdiction to assess information of public interest. .  

The court did not agree on the nature of the information contained in the archives of the former State Security. If this information is classified, then obviously the denial of access to it is explicitly provided for in the Constitution itself for reasons of national security - Article 41, paragraph 1, sentence 2 of the Constitution. If the information is not classified, it is not clear from which constitutional norm the National Assembly has an obligation to adopt (respectively preserve) such a law. In both cases, there is no ground for unconstitutionality of the disputed norm.

Therefore, the question of whether and to what extent the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff contain public information is decided by the National Assembly. It is the only body competent to assess whether a special law is needed to provide access to such information.

In view of the current state of the legal framework, it is appropriate to note that with the Instruction on the procedure for access to information contained in the documents from the archives of the Ministry of Interior (Reg. № І-113 of 24.06.2002), the right to access personal data has been granted to the persons for whom such data have been collected and stored in the archives of the Ministry of Interior. Every Bulgarian citizen, without the mediation of a specially created body, can see, respectively receive a copy of his file, the file of the deceased spouse, relatives in the direct line without restrictions, and in the lateral - to the second degree (Article 3 of the instruction), if such a file has been created by the bodies of the former State Security and is stored in the archives of the Ministry of Interior. The right of access for research, journalistic and research activities is regulated separately according to the procedure provided in the instruction - art. 4 of the instruction. The regulation thus created corresponds to the right to information, representing a legitimate interest for the citizens - art. 41, para 2 of the Constitution. Whether this regulation should be in law or a by-law is sufficient is a matter of the competence of the National Assembly.

In view of the above, the question of the need for a special law on access to the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff is a matter of legislative expediency. Only the National Assembly is competent to assess the existence of such a need. With the disputed § 37 of the transitional and final provisions, the National Assembly has exercised its constitutional power under Article 84, item 1 of the Constitution and the request in this part should be rejected.

According to Judges Hristo Danov, Nedelcho Beronov, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov and Zhivan Belchev, the provision of § 37 of the PHCIPC contradicts the Constitution and the request for its repeal must be granted for the following reasons:

Paragraph 37 of the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (promulgated, SG No. 63/97; Decision № 10 of the Constitutional Court of 1997 - promulgated, SG No. .89/97, amended, SG No. 69/99, SG No. 24/2001, Decision № 14 of the Constitutional Court of 2001 - promulgated, SG No. 52/2001; ., SG, issue 28/2002).

The Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security (SDBA), promulgated, SG No. 63/97, was also attacked in its entirety before the Constitutional Court. By Decision № 10/1997 (promulgated, SG No. 89/97) they were repealed as unconstitutional provisions in connection with the circle of persons holding certain state positions, which must be checked for cooperation with the services of the former State Security and the additional provision of the law, defining as "registered collaborators" those "whose names and pseudonyms appear in the reference file and in the registration diary of the former State Security". In the rest, the Constitutional Court accepted that the law is not in conflict with the Constitution.

The Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents of the former state security ZIDZDDBDS (promulgated, SG, issue 24/2001) was also referred to the Constitutional Court in its entirety. Procedural changes were indicated upon its adoption. Together and nevertheless, the petitioners wanted to declare unconstitutional the members involved in forming the composition, selecting and appointing the two commissions for disclosing documents and establishing affiliation with the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff. The establishment by the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Director of the National Intelligence Service and the Director of the National Service for Security of Working Groups in the administrative units and services headed by them was also attacked. documents of the former State Security and the former RFB, with the task of assessing the documents that are stored in the respective service or that have been handed over to them by natural or legal persons. It was also maintained that the law discredited and damaged the honor, dignity and reputation of citizens. It was also claimed that the texts that create an obligation for preliminary verification and declaration of affiliation to the former State Security Service and the Regional Forestry Board of certain categories of persons who have held, hold or apply to hold certain public positions are also unconstitutional. Considerations were also presented against the disclosure of persons who worked in the former specialized bodies of the State Security and military intelligence in favor of national security. The request stated that the law does not guarantee that an affected citizen will be able to defend himself.

By Decision № 14 of 2001 (promulgated, SG No. 52/2001), the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional only the provision of § 5 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which amends Article 3 of the Law on the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. , letter “e” regarding the declaration as collaborators of persons against whom “there is or has been initiated or terminated preliminary proceedings” for a crime committed by them, although according to the law they are among those whose names should not be disclosed in interest in national security.

The request for unconstitutionality of all other texts of the AML / CFT Act was rejected.

It follows that the Constitutional Court has already ruled on two main objections against the law repealed by § 37 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Freedoms, from which there is no reason to deviate.

The National Assembly, which according to Article 84, item 1 of the Constitution is authorized to adopt, amend, supplement and repeal laws, has the right, of course, to repeal any law. From this point of view, the repeal of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is naturally within the powers of the National Assembly. Hence, there would be nothing that would contradict the Constitution, if the repeal of the mentioned law does not affect the basic and guaranteed by it rights of the citizens, which have already been acquired. The point is, however, that § 37 of the CIPAA repeals a law that only guarantees a fundamental constitutional right that another of the existing laws does not provide.

When the repeal of a law leaves an unsettled matter, leaving the basic rights of citizens without legal protection, the violation of the Constitution is present. In this case, this is the right to information proclaimed in Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. As one of the basic rights of the citizens it is irrevocable according to art. 57, para 1 of it. Article 41 of the Constitution, which proclaims the right to information, is in Chapter Two, entitled "Fundamental Rights and Obligations of Citizens". The temporary restriction of some of the fundamental rights can only take place "in the event of a declaration of war, martial law or another state of emergency by law." In Decision № 10/97 on c.d. № 14/97 the Constitutional Court explicitly stated that “the right of the society to receive information that is of interest to it is a fundamental constitutional right”. According to Interpretative Decision № 7/96 under c.d. № 1/96 of the Constitutional Court the right of every citizen under Art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution to seek and receive information “is guaranteed by the obligations of the state bodies to provide it”. The Constitutional Court has explicitly emphasized that from the content of the right under Art. 41, para 1 of every citizen to seek and receive information arises an obligation to provide access to information, as the content of this obligation is subject to determination by law. Therefore, in addition to the negative nature of the right to information under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, expressed in the prohibition of the state to interfere with its exercise, its content includes the obligation of the state to provide access to information. Once defined by law as socially significant, this information cannot subsequently be declared the opposite - as non-socially significant; the state cannot deprive the society of access to the already announced type of information in a subsequent period, because the right of the citizens to receive it has been acquired, and according to art. 57, para 1 of the Constitution it is inadmissible to take away acquired fundamental rights.

In addition, in the cited decision the Constitutional Court pointed out that the right under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, traditionally treated as individual, is "associated with the formation of a common public space in which public opinion is formed" as a means of exercising democratic control. Therefore, the violation of the right to seek, receive and impart information also reflects on the process of exercising democratic control.

The law repealed by § 37 of the Law on National Consensus was created in 1997 in accordance with the declaration of the XXXVIII National Assembly for national consent (promulgated, SG No. 38/97). Point 5 of it states that "the opening of files of politicians, senior magistrates and administrators" will be supported in order to neutralize "their dependence on former security services".

The various provisions of the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security and the General Directorate of the General Staff ensured the informing of the public and individual citizens about important facts produced in the past and about circumstances that are important for them:

- search, collection, analysis and evaluation of documents containing information about the activities of the former State Security and the Regional Forestry Board;

- disclosure of the names of Bulgarian citizens who have held or are holding a public office or have performed public activity specified in the law, who have been full-time or part-time associates of the former services or have benefited from them;

- ensuring access of the affected persons to the relevant documents;

- preparation, publication and maintenance of a permanent report on the free internet access activity carried out in compliance with the law;

- possibility for the bodies, which appoint or elect persons to public positions listed in the law, to request from the established commission to carry out a preliminary check for establishing affiliation to the former DS or RUGSH of the candidates for such position;

- when scheduling elections, political parties and coalitions could request that the same be checked before the registration of candidates;

- Every Bulgarian citizen had the right to ask the relevant commission to make a reference to him, whether information was collected about him from the former State Security Service or the Regional Forestry Board and to give him the opportunity to get acquainted with it.

The law contained some exceptions for disclosing the names of full-time and part-time employees when this would endanger the national security of the country or endanger the life and personal freedom of an individual.

The repealed law, despite the improvements that would be useful, created a high opportunity for the individual citizen to understand the circumstances hidden for him for many years, because of which he suffered, and in many cases destroyed his entire life. The public could also be made aware of the methods used by the former secret services , the past and possible connections of some public figures, as well as those for whom it must express its views in the forthcoming elections.

With the repeal of the VAT Act, the society and the individual citizen are deprived of this opportunity. They have been deprived of an already acquired right to the said information. The ability of civil society to exercise control over the development of the democratic process in the country has also been taken away.

All the arguments that the information gap that has appeared can be filled by other laws and newly created by-laws are unfounded.

The seized information cannot be obtained through the Access to Public Information Act (APIA). First of all, Article 4, paragraph 1 of it excludes its application, "if another law provides for a special procedure for seeking, receiving and disseminating" public information. And based on Article 2, paragraph 3 of the same, access to personal data is excluded. Article 8, paragraph 2 of the APIA stipulates that the law does not apply to information stored in the State Archives. It follows that if some materials are transferred to the fund, access to them cannot be carried out under the APIA. Moreover, according to § 9, para 1 of the CIPAA, the materials and documents prepared before the entry into force of the law, marked with the respective degrees of secrecy, are considered to be marked with a classification level according to the CIPA, as the terms for secrecy are calculated from the date of creation of materials and documents in accordance with the same law. The APIA is not applicable when the access to information affects a third party and does not have his explicit written consent.

The Personal Data Protection Act also cannot replace the access to information provided by the Act repealed by § 37 of the Law on Personal Data Protection.

The processing of personal data for individuals can take place only after the “free and unambiguous” consent of the person whose data are processed (Art. 20, para 1 in connection with Art. 19 LPPD). According to Art. 20, para 2, item 1 of LPPD, the consent is not required when “it refers to personal data collected and processed by virtue of an obligation under law”. By order determined by law and according to art. 35, para 1, item 2, information may be obtained from the register or the documents containing public information. Pursuant to Article 25, paragraph 1, item 1 of the LPPD, after the completion of the processing of personal data, the administrator provided for in the law (natural or legal person and state body) may destroy them.

Both the APIA and the LPPD do not provide the opportunity to obtain and store the information that was allowed by the repealed VAT Act.

Pursuant to Art. 125b, para 1, item 1 of the Law on the Ministry of Interior (LMI) (promulgated, SG, issue 122/97, amended, issues 70, 73 and 153/98). No. 30 and 110/99, No. 1 and 29/2000, No. 28/2001 and No. 45/2002) The Information and Archives Directorate is the one that receives, registers and processes documents created by the services and directorates of the Ministry of Interior and creates funds for temporary and permanent preservation. It proposes to the Minister of Interior archival documents for declassification (Art. 125b, para 1, item 2) and proposes to him the procedure and the manner for destruction of the documents in the directorates and services. According to Art. 125b, para 3 of the LMI, the Minister is the one who, through the above-mentioned directorate, manages the archival fund of the ministry. In this sense is the letter to the Constitutional Court of the Minister of the Interior (Register № I 7759 of 3 July 2002) in connection with the clarification of this issue.

By letter № 1160 of 27 June 2002, the Minister of Defense informed the CS that the bulk of the archives of the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff were kept in an information service. Those that concern issues of a general nature and have expired in the service have been handed over to the Central Military Archives with the same degree of secrecy and a period of "eternal" storage. According to the letter, the use was made with the permission of the director of the Military Information Service, as the issue was regulated by the Manual on Archives in the Bulgarian People's Army, approved by Ministerial Order № 0440 / 17.12.1963.

The instruction of the Minister of Interior issued on 24.06.2002 on the procedure for access to information contained in the documents from the archival funds of the Ministry of Interior cannot fill the gap that remains after the repeal of the Law on the Ministry of Interior. First of all, it is not a by-law, as the instruction is, but the law, which can guarantee with certainty the constitutional right of the citizens to be informed (art. 41, para 2 K). In addition, the possible information that can be obtained according to the instruction on personal data of the person concerned or of his deceased spouse, relatives in the direct line without restriction and in the collateral line up to the second degree, as well as access to information from archival research documents, journalistic and research activities do not complete all the information provided by the repealed law. Missing opportunity:

- to disclose the names of the Bulgarian citizens who have held or are holding a public office or have performed public activity, specified in the repealed law, who have been full-time or part-time associates of the former services or have benefited from them;

- the bodies that appoint or elect persons to public positions listed in the repealed law, to request from the existing commission under the same law to carry out a preliminary check to establish affiliation to the former State Security or BFSA for the candidates for such position;

- when scheduling elections, political parties and coalitions to request that the same be checked before the registration of candidates;

- every Bulgarian citizen to ask the relevant commission to make a reference to him, whether information has been collected about him from the former State Security Service or the Regional Forestry Board and to give him the opportunity to get acquainted with it.

This instruction cannot be applied to the archives of the former General Directorate of the General Staff and the archives of the former First General Directorate of the State Security, which is stored in the archives of the National Intelligence Service, as the Minister of Interior has the right to order only in connection with your office. The instruction refers only to the archives of the Ministry of Interior.

Paragraph 37 of the LCI also takes away the possibility to apply Articles 26, items 3 and 59, para 2, item 3 of the Radio and Television Act (RTA), promulgated, SG, issue 138/98, amended. , issue 81/99, issue 79/2000, issue 96 and 112/2001, which are in force and according to which they cannot be members of the Council for electronic media, as well as of the managing boards of the Bulgarian National Television and the Bulgarian National Radio persons who were full-time or part-time associates of the former State Security.

With the repeal of the Law on State Property Management by virtue of § 37, para 1 of the CIPA, the activity of the state bodies established by it is also terminated. The tangible fixed assets of the state bodies that have terminated their operation under the repealed law shall be provided to the State Commission on Information Security (§ 37, para 2).

If it is accepted, which would be incorrect, that the terms for protection of the classified information, established in art. 34, para 1 and 2 of CIPA, also apply to the materials of the former security services (they are not specified in § 1, item. 1 of the additional provisions of the law and the facts, which establish the relevant documents, cannot be subsumed under any of the lists in the list of categories of information subject to classification as a state secret under Annex № 1 to Art. 25 CIPA), then Art. .34, para 3 of this law, according to which after the expiration of these terms and removal of the level of the classification the access to it is carried out by the order of APIA, becomes meaningless. In the meantime, the stakeholders may have long since died, and over the years they may have played the role of no longer having a public interest in historical facts that are useful to be known by future generations so that they never happen again.

Article 13 of the repealed VAT Act forbade the destruction of the documents of the former DS and RUGB. After their disclosure under the repealed law, they were to be handed over and stored in the Central State Archives. In this way, on the one hand, the preservation of the materials was guaranteed, and on the other hand, everyone was given access to the documents that had already been announced.

In the absence of a provision similar to Art. in a civilized society, the methods of past communist rule and the encroachment on tens of thousands of human destinies will not remain hidden from society and from those directly affected, and will not be destroyed.

On the other hand, there may be classified documents that do not in fact endanger our national interests, because they were created at a different time and a different environment, which are denied and have nothing to do with the current security and governance of the state.

The conclusion from the repeal of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by § 37 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is that there will be no security for keeping the archives of the former State Security and the Republic of Bulgaria, the interested parties or public organizations and mass media. It will not be possible to trace and reveal the methods and actions of the repressive services of the past. It will not be possible to check and announce the persons who have held or are holding public positions or carrying out public actions, as well as to check the affiliation to the former DS or RUGSH of those who are applying for the most responsible elected positions. The public undoubtedly needs such information and the right to receive it is given to it by the Constitution. The repeal of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities undoubtedly violates the right of everyone to seek and receive information established by Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

This right was proclaimed at the 65th plenary session of 14.12.1946 at the first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations in the section for convening an international conference on freedom of information. It is said that "freedom of information is a fundamental human right." According to the UN General Assembly, it is the cornerstone of all the freedoms to which the United Nations is committed. "Freedom of information includes the right to broadcast and publish news anywhere and without restriction." It is "a key element of all serious efforts to favor peace and progress in the world."

Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that “everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this freedom includes the right to hold opinions without hindrance and the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. " The right to information is also enshrined in Article 5, item 2 and Article 19, item 2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in Article 10, items 1 and 2 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights. and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950

Both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 3) and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Article 10, paragraph 2) provide for the possibility of certain restrictions on the right to information. They relate to an obligation to respect the rights and reputation of others, national security, public order, the authority of justice, public health and morals. Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria also contains restrictions on the right to seek and receive information, which are in accordance with the above. They are listed: the law cannot be directed against the rights and good name of other citizens, as well as against national security, public order, public health and morals. Pursuant to Article 41, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, no information may be requested on circumstances which constitute a state or other secret protected by law or affect foreign rights.

In Decision № 10/1997 of the Constitutional Court, which has already been cited, assuming that the right of society to receive information is a fundamental constitutional right, at the same time it is said that it is not absolute. Absolute rights by their nature, according to the Constitutional Court, are the restrictions of this right, explicitly written in Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. In interpreting this text in Decision № 7/1996, the Constitutional Court says that in adopting the texts set for interpretation “the constitutional legislator was guided and brought in the text” of Chapter Two of the Constitution, referring to the fundamental rights and obligations of citizens, "ideas and permits from the two international pacts (treaties) ratified at that time and entered into force for the Republic of Bulgaria - the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights". The interpretative decision of the Constitutional Court indicates that the exceptions provided for in Article 41 of the Constitution are subject to restrictive interpretation. The rights under Articles 39 - 41 of the Constitution "are the basis of the democratic process and contribute to its functioning", it is said in section I, para 3 of the operative part of the decision. Decision № 14/2001 on c.d. № 7/2001 complied with and adopted the opinions of the Constitutional Court under Decision № 10/1997. It was accepted that the disclosure of the names of the full-time and part-time associates of the former State Security and RUGB did not harm the honor, dignity and good name of the persons. It is pointed out that the incompatibility established in § 2a, para 2 of the additional provisions of the ACSAA for holding some of the most responsible public positions with performing activity as a full-time or part-time associate of an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service is not violated. the constitutional right to work, as everyone has the right to choose in which of the two spheres to invest their efforts and to exercise it. The Constitutional Court has also held that disclosing the names of Bulgarian citizens who were full-time or part-time associates of the former State Security Service or the Regional Forestry Board or were beneficiaries of them does not contradict the preamble of Article 9 of the Constitution.

Article 25 of the CIPA stipulates that a state secret is the information listed in Annex на 1 to the text of the law. From the categories of information listed in this list, subject to classification as a state or official secret, it can be seen that none of the items on this list refers to and cannot refer to the information and documents of the former State Security and RUGB, which are disclosed under the force of the repealed law. First of all, the enumeration of the security services, which makes § 1 of the additional provisions of the CIPA, shows that in the sense of it the security services are the current state structures in the Republic of Bulgaria, and not the former special services. The same § 1, item 14 indicates the interests of the current Republic of Bulgaria, and not the interests of the former People's Republic, a member of the Warsaw Pact. Therefore, all the information listed in Annex № 1 to Article 25 of the CIPA, including in Section II, item 5 (data that may help to identify persons who are not employees, but cooperate or have cooperated with the services for security and public order) cannot refer to the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria and its present security bodies.

As early as 1994 (promulgated, SG No. 86/94), which was not repealed by the CIPA, the National Assembly adopted that “Information on the organization, methods and means in the performance of the specific tasks of the bodies of State security, as well as the intelligence information of these bodies, relating to or related to the period up to 13 October 1991, shall not be considered as constituting a state secret within the meaning of items 19 and 20 of the List of Facts, Information and Subjects Constituting a State Secret of the Republic of Bulgaria ”(promulgated, SG, issue 31 of 1990, amended, issues 90 and 99 of 1992). And with § 43 PZRZZKI also this list is canceled.

In point 9 of its Resolution 96 1096/96 on measures to destroy the legacy of the former communist totalitarian systems, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe "welcomes the opening of the archives of the secret services to public scrutiny in some former communist totalitarian countries". The resolution advises all these countries "to enable the persons concerned to check, at their request, the files which the former secret services have kept for them". Point 15 of the Resolution recommends that the authorities in the above-mentioned countries "verify that their laws, regulations and procedures comply with the principles contained in this resolution and correct them if necessary".

In accordance with all the above-mentioned acts of the international organizations of which Bulgaria is a member, the so-called experts on international law, national security and human rights adopted on October 1, 1995, are also adopted. Johannesburg Principles. It should be noted that the recommendations of Resolution 1096/1996 and the compliance of the legislation with the above-mentioned number of international acts were implemented by the former communist countries, which adopted laws to disclose the files of the repressive services of the totalitarian regime. The former Czechoslovakia passed a law as early as October 1991. A law of 8 March 2002 amending Law Закон 140/96 on access to files created by the former State Security and certain other laws is in force in the Czech Republic today. In Hungary, Act XXIII of 1994 on the screening of persons holding high public and public office, as well as on the file service, is in force. In Poland, the Law on the Work or Service of Persons Performing Public Functions in the State Security Bodies or Cooperation with Them for the Period 1944-1999 was adopted on 11 April 1997. Romania has its own Law № 187/99 on access to the personal file and the disclosure of the Securitate as a political police. In Germany, this issue was resolved in December 1991 with a law on documents of the State Security Service of the former GDR (Stasi Documents Act).

In this comparative legal environment, the CIPA repealed by § 37 of the TFR the only law that allowed the storage and disclosure of documents on the organization and activities of the former State Security and the BFSA, to disclose the names of persons holding responsible public positions and performing responsible public activity, and it under a series of conditions related to national security considerations, as well as to check in advance the candidates for some of the highest state positions. The repealed law also provided an opportunity to get acquainted with the materials that the former repressive authorities had collected for them within a period that was still useful for those interested.

The repeal of the SDBDSRUGSH directly affects both the interests of the society, which has the right to know its past and the methods of the services that determined it, and the affected, whose lives have been miserable, being deprived of the most basic human rights. rights and the right to a happy and peaceful life. In addition, history is deprived of sources of information, without which it cannot properly characterize and give an objective assessment of both the period during which the former State Security Service and the WWG operated, as well as themselves as institutions.

The deprivation of these opportunities violates Art. 41 and Art. 57, para. 1 of the Constitution, due to which § 37 of the PHCIP is unconstitutional.

On the basis of all the above and in the absence of an achieved majority of the members of the Constitutional Court to issue a decision under § 37 of the RHIPCI on the grounds of Art. 149, para 2, item 2 and Art. 151, para 1 of the Constitution the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to declare the unconstitutionality of the following provisions of the Classified Information Protection Act (promulgated, SG No. 45/2002): Art. 35, para 1 and 5, Art. .43, para 5, art. 57, para 5, art. 59, para 5, art. 60, para 5, and § 37 of the transitional and final provisions.


JUDGMENT № 4
Sofia, 24 September 2002
constitutional case № 14/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Georgi Markov
(Promulgated, SG No. 93 of October 1, 2002)

 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov - Rapporteur, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on June 12, 2002 at the request of 48 MPs from the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of § 28 of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria (ZIDZOVSRB) - SG, iss. 40/2002

The applicants maintain that the above provision contradicts Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 6, paragraph 2, Article 9, Article 88, paragraph 1 and Article 105, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

By order of 27 June 2002, the application was admitted on the merits. The National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Defense are constituted with the same definition as interested parties in the case.

In pursuance of the opportunity provided to them, written statements on the request were sent by the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Defense, who pleaded for the rejection of the request. The applicants submitted additional considerations in support of their claim.

The Constitutional Court, after assessing the arguments put forward in the request and the opinions of the interested parties, and the evidence presented in the case, accepts the following:

According to the provision of § 28 of the Law on Military Personnel, the age limit for military service is changed as follows: for officers with the rank of “colonel”, “captain I rank” - from 56 to 53 years; for officers with the rank of "Brigadier General", "Brigadier Admiral" - from 57 to 54 years; for officers with the rank of "Major General", "Rear Admiral" - from 58 to 55 years; for officers with the rank of "lieutenant general", "vice admiral" - from 59 to 56 years and for officers with the rank of "general", "admiral" - from 60 to 57 years.

By the same norm, the age limit for officers with the military rank of "colonel" and higher, who are habilitated persons and occupy a position requiring habilitation, as well as for persons with the scientific degree "Doctor of Science" is from 57 to 54 years.

The impugned provision does not contradict the Constitution.

The Law on Amendments to the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria was adopted in two votes, held in separate sittings, which is in full compliance with the requirements of Article 88, para. 1, assoc. first of the Constitution.

Possible violation of procedural rules, not provided for in the Constitution, and in the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly do not lead to violation of the basic law - Decision № 1/1999 under c.d. № 34/98, Decision № 4/1995 on c.d. № 2/95, Decision № 5/1998 on c.d. № 2/98 of the Constitutional Court.

The Constitution does not require full identity of the legislative texts adopted at first and second reading. The Basic Law does not limit the possibility of the legislator on the basis of the debates made and the proposals presented at the first reading by the Members of Parliament to correct and supplement the bills at the second reading. Especially when these proposals do not contradict the principles of the bill adopted at the first vote, as is the case with § 28 ZIDZOVSRB.

The violation of Article 105, paragraph 2 of the Constitution claimed by the applicants due to non-participation in the legislative process of the government and of other state bodies related to the armed forces of the Republic of Bulgaria is also unfounded. This is because Bulgaria is a republic with a parliamentary government and according to the Constitution - art. 1, para. 1, art. 62 and art. 84, item 1, namely the National Assembly exercises sovereign and independent legislative power by adopting, amending, supplements and repeals the laws.

The violation of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution maintained in the request is also missing. It should be borne in mind that restricting the rights of certain social groups of citizens is permissible under the Constitution when these restrictions are socially necessary and we are talking about the effectiveness of the Bulgarian army and the effectiveness of our national security - Decision № 14/1992 on k. e. № 14/1992. In this sense is also Decision № 18/1997 under c.d. № 12/1997, by which the court held that “The right of a person to hold a certain position is not absolute in nature. It is subject to various restrictions of an objective and subjective nature. Such restrictions may stem from different constitutional values ​​and principles… ”In this case, this is the provision of Article 9 of the Constitution, according to which the armed forces must optimally guarantee the sovereignty, security and independence of the country and protect its territorial integrity.

Therefore, the reduction of the age limit for military service cannot be considered as a restriction of rights within the meaning of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law, as it is the specifics of the activity that has imposed this legislative decision, which is in within the framework of legislative expediency. In this regard, the general trend towards increasing the retirement age in our legislation is irrelevant.

In view of the above and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 48 Members of Parliament from the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of § 28 of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria (SG, issue 40/2002).

 
Special opinion of Judge Hristo Danov
I believe that the decision made today under c.d. № 5/2002 is incorrect for the following reasons:
1. The term provided for in the provision of § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP is preclusive, not statute-barred. Therefore, by not observing it by virtue of the effect of the law itself, it is extinguished and ceases to exist. In that regard, it seems to me that the argument that it is a limitation period is unfounded. The statute of limitations is not applied ex officio and therefore the announcement of repayment of creditors' receivables takes place precisely by virtue of the law itself and not at the initiative of the debtor.
2. The receivables represent part of the right of ownership in the sense of art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution and in this direction are the explicit motives of Decision № 2/2000 (promulgated, SG, issue 29/2000). which I share. In this direction is the article of Dr. Yu.n. Pavel Stefanov The concept of "property" according to the Constitution ". Mr. Contemporary Law, 2001, № 6. This is a fundamental right that cannot be violated.
3. By virtue of the provision of Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, the law must create equal legal conditions for economic activity of all citizens and legal entities. By Decision № 19/93 (promulgated, SG No. 4/94) the Constitutional Court has adopted the following verbatim: “by virtue of Article 86 of the Constitution, the National Assembly has the right to adopt laws on any issues without to be provided for any conditions or requirements in their subject and content, as long as they do not contradict the general principles and rules of the Constitution. ”
In the reasons and item 2 of the operative part of its decision the Constitutional Court has explicitly accepted that "in the exercise of private property all legal entities are equal". I consider this decision to be fundamental to resolving this case now, and I do not see why it should be abandoned. Moreover, the provision of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is a fundamental right in the structure of the rule of law, which by virtue of this decision limits the possibilities of the National Assembly to create laws that contradict it. The economic expediency, which obviously guided the legislator in creating this norm, cannot be a ground for non-observance of the basic requirements of the Constitution.
This fundamental right cannot be derogated from by law and unequal relations can be created between the individual economic entities in our country. In this case, receivables representing part of the property of a subject are repaid by law, which is equivalent to their forcible confiscation, without proper compensation - Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. In this case, the operation is carried out by already created inequality of economic entities.
In view of the above, I find that the norm of § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP is inconsistent with the Constitution and its above provisions, therefore the decision in this case is incorrect and followed the request to be granted.
JUDGMENT № 5
Sofia, 26 September 2002
constitutional case № 5/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Penka Tomcheva
(Promulgated, SG No. 95 of 8 October 2002)

 

 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva - Rapporteur

The case was initiated at the request of a panel of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fourth Civil Division (SCC, IV year) to declare unconstitutionality of § 6a of the transitional and final provisions of the Law on Transformation and Privatization of State and Municipal Enterprises (LPPDOP, promulgated). .,SG, issue 38/92, amended, SG No. 45/96, amended, SG No. 20/2000, etc.). The considerations are that in the judicial application of the said provision under gr.d. № 76/2001 according to the inventory of the Supreme Court of Cassation, IV year the court panel found that the disputed provision put in a more favorable position the privatized or privatized enterprise, owned by a subject with sovereign powers, by other legal and economic entities, which violated Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. As a result, the constitutionally established principles of the rule of law (Article 4, paragraph 1) and the inviolability of private property (Article 17, paragraphs 3 and 5) were affected. The impugned provision led to the unconstitutional forcible expropriation of private property.

In accordance with Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the court panel suspended the consideration of the said case and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution submitted the issue to the Constitutional Court on 07.03.2002.

In the meantime, on March 13, 2002, the 39th National Assembly adopted a new Law on Privatization and Post-Privatization Control (PCPA), promulgated, SG, issue 28 of March 19, 2002, in force since March 23, 2002. § 12 of the transitional and final provisions of the said new law, the previous LPPDOP was completely repealed, for which the disputed provision of § 6a has already been referred to the Constitutional Court. Simultaneously with § 17, para 6 of the TFP of the new law for the cases of concluded privatization contracts as of the date of its entry into force it is provided for the provision of § 6a of the TFR of the claims of private and public creditors to the privatized enterprise repealed LPPDOP in connection with Article 142 of the Tax Procedure Code.

Due to the mentioned legislative changes by order № 55 of 30.05.2002 and letter № 76/2001 of the same date the petitioner has notified the Constitutional Court that he supports the request both for § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP and for § 17, para. .6 of the TFP of the new PCPA.

By a ruling of 11 June 2002, the Constitutional Court admitted for consideration on the merits the initial (for § 6a) and supplemented (for § 17, para. 6) request as upheld by the petitioners and constituted parties to the case.

The views of interested parties are as follows:

The National Assembly does not express a definite opinion on the request. The Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce substantiate the thesis that the request is unfounded. In summary, it is maintained that the disputed provision achieves a balance between the interests of creditors and investors, and in view of the other provisions of the law declared under § 6a claims can be included in the economic and legal analysis of the privatized enterprise in order to ensure their satisfaction.

In the opposite sense is the opinion of the Supreme Bar Council, according to which the provision of § 6a deprives specific legal entities of their rights, "without providing them with adequate protection in case of missed deadlines." There was "inadmissible procedural privilege and at the same time unfavorable material consequences, constituting deprivation of subjective rights of creditors". The requirement for urgent notification of a body that is outside the obligatory relationship of creditors and debtors constitutes a "violation of the principles and norms of the Constitution and of the legal order established for thousands of years."

The Constitutional Court, having considered the request in comparison with the constitutional provisions and the opinions of the parties, accepts the following:

І. On the scope of the unconstitutionality review

The supported request for the texts of the two laws and the attached legislative approach to repeal the entire previous law, and at the same time to "resurrect" part of it in the new law by explicitly referring to a specific provision of the already repealed law requires the Constitutional Court to rule , as maintained: for unconstitutionality of the initially disputed provision of § 6a of the TFP of LPPDOP (repealed) and of the provision of § 17, para 6 of the TFP of the current PCPA (in which it is incorporated). Insofar as the additionally disputed provision of § 17, para 6 of the new privatization law, apart from the reference to § 6a, also contains new provisions, they do not change the purpose and essence of § 6a. Additionally, the disputed provision of § 17, para 6 of the TFP of the new law has a more limited scope - it refers to privatization contracts that were concluded before the entry into force of the new law, and is in connection with Article 142 of The Tax Procedure Code. In fact, it is a matter of challenging a single legislative decision, formulated in § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP, which is contained in the two laws - repealed and in force, inextricably linked due to the adopted legislative approach.

In view of this, the inspection for violation of the Constitution covers the text of § 6a of the TFP of the repealed law. It is also decisive for § 17, para 6 of the current law, which in turn is applicable only to concluded privatization contracts under the repealed privatization law.

ІІ. On the merits of the request

1. It is understood from the content of the disputed provision that in order not to lose the possibility to file a claim for their receivables from privatized, respectively already privatized (§ 17, para 6) enterprises, the private and public creditors followed in the 6a six-month term and order to declare them in writing before the respective body under art. 3, para 1 LPPDOP, to whom the law with art. 3, para 4 LPPDOP assigns to prepare and conclude the privatization deals. The impugned provision contains: a) a requirement for a certain action by the creditors of enterprises, announced for privatization through a respective publication in the State Gazette; b) 6-month term for performing the action and the consequences of not declaring.

The rule formulated in § 6a and transferred to § 17, para 6 of the current law, applicable after 23.03.2002, when the new law enters into force only in respect of concluded privatization contracts during the validity of the repealed LPPDOP, does not contain signs of unconstitutionality.

2. The regulation is intended for the implementation of a fundamental economic reform - privatization (called privatization in the law). The privatization itself, carried out in pursuance of a political decision, is in line with the constitutional norms of Article 17, paragraph 4, according to which the regime of state and municipal property is determined by law and Article 19, paragraph 1, which decrees that the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria be based on free economic initiative. Dedicated to privatization, the Law on Public Procurement (repealed) and the Public Procurement Act regulate in detail the issues related to privatization. The impugned provision covers some of these issues and is intended to regulate certain legal relations that arose before the opening of the privatization procedure, which are important for three groups of legal and business entities - the privatized enterprise, its creditors and prospective buyers of the enterprise. .

3. With the requirement contained in § 6a, addressed to the creditors of state and municipal enterprises announced for privatization, they are not deprived of the right to claim, the right of ownership, but are directed within a certain period to take a formal action, namely to secure these rights over their claims against that category of debtors. The provision does not discredit or favor the interests of anyone. The disputed regime for these claims, established by § 6a, is derived from the objectives of privatization, which is not contested and cannot continue indefinitely.

4. In case of urgent implementation of the legal prescription, several effects are achieved: the creditor notifies of his claim, which guarantees him the opportunity to seek it in court in the future (in order to receive it from the new owner of the privatized enterprise, respectively apply for the purchase by the order of art. 29, para 2 of LPPDOP). The privatization bodies (under Art. 3, para 1), and through them the candidate-buyers shall receive the information due to them about the actual financial and economic condition of the enterprise announced for privatization. This information is important for determining the real privatization price. The final result is an opportunity to conclude an optimal for the parties, and therefore a stable privatization deal, while at the same time guaranteeing the rights of third parties to the privatization relationship, such as the creditors of the privatized enterprise.

5. In the event of inaction, the creditor "loses his right to claim these claims". This procedural restriction is a legal incentive for operational conduct. The loss of the right of action will be the result of the passive conduct of the creditor in preserving his property and the legal mechanisms for its protection, and not because its provision deprives him of the said rights. The disputed provision does not lead to the forcible expropriation of the property of the creditor's claims, contrary to Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. It guarantees and protects the right of ownership over the specified category of receivables, as obliged by Article 17, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

6. The diversity and specificity of the different economic spheres presupposes the need for different legal regimes for the efficient implementation of their respective different activities. The process of privatization as a legal basis for the creation of new, qualitatively different business entities is characterized by certain specifics, which necessarily requires the application of a flexible regulatory approach to achieve the goals of privatization - speed, stability of transactions and efficiency of newly created business units. Due to such necessity, under certain conditions some constitutional norms allow a nuanced legislative decision. Thus, the constitutional rule of Art. 19, para 2, according to which the law creates and guarantees to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity, is not absolute. It refers to the same legal conditions for all economic and legal entities carrying out the same or similar activities in a certain field, but not necessarily equality between all different economic spheres. Considerations for expediency, as well as the existence of a need to achieve socially priority and significant goals, such as the goals of privatization, allow for differences in legislative decisions, without contradicting the constitutional principle under Article 19, paragraph 2. In a similar sense are other decisions of the Constitutional Court, such as Decision № 9/99 on c.d. № 8/99, promulgated, SG, issue 57/99, Decision № 30/98 under c.d. № 23/98, promulgated, SG, issue 137/98. In areas outside the economic one, not less significant than it, the legislative practice applies decisions similar to the disputed provision - art. 267 CPC, art. 227, para 3 of the CPA, art. 57, para 4 of the PPC, etc.

7. The requirement introduced by the disputed provision for the creditor's claim to be declared before the respective body under Art. 3 of the LPPDOP, ie. before a body "foreign to the legal relationship from which it arose" does not contradict constitutional norms. This requirement is caused by the specifics of the privatization process. The bodies under Article 3 of the LPPDOP are not arbitrary, but legally determined. They are assigned to adopt decisions for privatization of state and municipal enterprises (Article 3, paragraph 1 of the LPPDOP), the management bodies of state enterprises of these bodies "are obliged to provide them with the documents and information necessary for the privatization transaction" (Article 4a). Therefore, the contested requirement to notify those authorities does not in any way prejudice the interests of creditors. Conversely, with this requirement, due to a body external to the bond relationship, but explicitly specified by law to carry out the privatization, creditors are in a way guaranteed for their claims.

8. The legislative decision regarding the term referred to in § 6a is not unconstitutional. According to the court panel, in practice and theory there was a dispute over the legal characteristics of the term, but nevertheless its legal introduction affected "all receivables with the addressee of the privatized enterprise, regardless of the grounds, type and amount."

The question of the legal characteristics of the term is irrelevant to the question of the constitutionality of the disputed provision. If necessary, this issue can be resolved in the order of interpretation by the General Assembly of the Civil Collegium of the Supreme Court of Cassation.

The allegation that this affected all receivables with the addressee of the privatized enterprise is incorrect. With the amendment of the provision (SG, issue 20/2000) the receivables for remuneration are excluded from this category. The diversity in terms of the type, amount and basis of the claims, which are subject to written declaration according to the requirement of § 6a, does not substantiate, but refutes the thesis of unconstitutionality. It is obvious that the legal conditions for all creditors of the company announced for privatization are the same, regardless of the type, amount and basis of their receivables.

9. The provision of art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution, according to which the private property is inviolable, contains a prohibition for disposing of it without or despite the disagreement of the owner. The rule of § 6a does not disregard the will of the creditor of the privatized, resp. privatized enterprise in respect of its own receivables. It is possible to exercise the right within a certain period. The length of the term is irrelevant, because there are no constitutional requirements regarding the terms. Their diversity in law - statute of limitations, preclusive, terms for exercising procedural rights, terms for restriction of certain personal rights in criminal law, etc., and their dependence on the diversity and development of the respective public relations for which they are intended, determines the differences in their duration.

10. The constitutional principle for the rule of law under Art. 4, para 1 means the existence of order, rules in the exercise of power. The state is legal when it is governed by the Constitution and laws. Laws, in turn, should be clear, precise and unconstitutional.

The disputed § 6a, as already noted, does not contradict Article 17, paragraphs 3 and 5 and Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The provision regulates certain legal relations, which due to the ongoing privatization need additional regulation in order to comply with this principle. A legal rule has been created to address life-threatening needs that affect all legal entities in the field of privatization, directly or indirectly related to it. Therefore, the provision of § 6a does not contradict Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

The reference to the minutes of the plenary sessions shows that the disputed provision was adopted on 14 May 1996 in compliance with the requirements of Article 81 and Article 88 of the Constitution.

In conclusion, the conclusion that is necessary is that with the disputed provision of § 6a of the TFP of LPPDOP (repealed) and included in the provision of § 17, para. 6 of the current PCPA, the indicators indicated by the petitioners or other constitutional norms have not been violated.

For the stated reasons according to art. 22, para 1 of the LCS the request, based on the provision of art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, should be rejected, due to which the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of a panel of judges of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fourth Civil Division to declare unconstitutional § 6a of the transitional and final provisions of the Law on Transformation and Privatization of State and Municipal Enterprises, promulgated, SG, issue 38/92, amended ., issue 42/2001, repealed, and of § 17, para 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the current Law for privatization and post-privatization control, promulgated, SG, iss. 28/2002

 

 
JUDGMENT № 6
Sofia, 1 October 2002
constitutional case № 9/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Lyudmil Neykov (Promulgated, SG No. 95
of 8 October 2002)

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov - Rapporteur, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on 29 April 2002 at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria. It is requested to establish the unconstitutionality of the provision of art. 57a, item 2 of the Physical Education and Sports Act (LFSA), promulgated, SG, issue 58/1996, amended. andsuppl., SG 53/97, issue 124/1998, issue 51/1999, issue 81/1999, issue 53/2000, issue 64/2000 . and No. 75/2002. It is alleged that the challenged provision contradicts Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 60 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as it does not provide for the possibility for the state to oblige natural and legal persons to pay to various departments and bodies for management of deductions from the revenues from the lawful activity exercised by them. The only possibilities for imposing financial obligations are those specified in Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and their supplementation cannot be done by law. Such an action would also violate the constitutional principle of justice, as the challenged provision burdens only sports organizations, and without taking into account their income and property.

By a ruling of 21 May 2002, the Constitutional Court allowed the examination of the Prosecutor General's request on the merits and constituted as interested parties in the case: the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Chairman of the State Agency for Youth and Sports, the Bulgarian Sports Union. and the Professional Football League.

In pursuance of the opportunity provided by the Constitutional Court, opinions were received from the interested parties.

The written statements of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance and the Chairman of the State Agency for Youth and Sports state that the disputed provision is constitutional and the request should be rejected as unfounded. It is pointed out that the deductions provided for in the challenged provision are made from acquired revenues from legal transactions, such as transfers of athletes, and are paid to the budget of the State Agency for Youth and Sports, which is part of the national budget. It is maintained that this is done in accordance with the constitutional obligation of the state to promote the development of sports and tourism according to Article 52, paragraph 3 of the Constitution.

The opinion of the Professional Football League supports the request of the Prosecutor General to repeal Article 57a of the LFVS. It is pointed out that the football clubs as commercial companies by virtue of art. 57, para 2 ZFVS pay only taxes and fees according to their constitutional obligation under art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution. It is argued that the need to support the development of any area of ​​public life cannot be grounds for obliging legal entities with financial obligations not provided for by the Constitution in favor of the state and its bodies.

After the admission by the Constitutional Court for consideration of the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria and the receipt of written statements from the constituted interested parties, the National Assembly adopted a Law amending the Law on Physical Education and Sports ( promulgated, SG No. 75 of 2.08. 2002). According to an additional provision - § 34 - throughout the law the words “the chairman of the State Agency for Youth and Sports” and “the State Agency for Youth and Sports” are replaced by “Minister of Youth and Sports” and “Ministry of Youth and Sports” respectively. The amendment is taken into account in the following statement.

In order to rule on the request, the Constitutional Court took into account the following:

With Art. 57a ZFVS, the legislator has indicated the sources through which funds come from the budget of the Ministry of Youth and Sports (MMC). The attacked point two of this provision imposes an obligation on sports organizations to participate in the collection of revenues from the budget of the IMC through deductions in the amount of three percent of their revenues from the transfer of athletes, the funds raised are used to finance activities with children and adolescents in the respective sport. This norm essentially establishes additional financial burdens, apart from the tax obligations established by Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, expressed in the form of deductions of amounts from revenues from legally executed transfer transactions. Along with the existing obligation for the payment of the respective tax on income from transfer transaction, the obligation to make a deduction from this income in favor of the budget of the IMC is also imposed.

The disputed provision has no constitutional basis. There is no constitutional norm from which to derive the existence of a power of any state body to assign to natural and legal persons other financial burdens, including for financing the activity for children and adolescents in the respective sport, apart from the payment of taxes and fees. . It is indisputable that such a financial burden is the disputed obligation imposed by Article 57, item 2 of the LFVS. The constitutional provision creates only an obligation to pay taxes and fees, but not obligations to make deductions from amounts realized in the performance of an activity permitted by law.

The argument that the Constitution does not explicitly exclude the possibility, along with the obligation to pay statutory taxes on revenues, to make deductions from these revenues in favor of the budget of state bodies, cannot give a constitutional character to the challenged legal norm. The provision of Art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution exhaustively indicates the financial obligations to the state - taxes and fees. This excludes the possibility of expanding their circle. There is no obligation between them, although established by law, to make deductions of amounts from acquired revenues from transactions, along with their taxation, which has its constitutional basis in Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

In this regard, the obligation imposed by the impugned provision to make the disputed deductions cannot be equated with the obligation to pay taxes and fees regulated by Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution due to the different legal and economic characteristics of these concepts. While the deduction represents the allocation of funds with a specific purpose or a reduction, a deduction from a certain amount, the tax, as the Constitutional Court has already had the opportunity to clarify with Decision № 8/97 under c.d. № 3/97, is a mandatory payment, determined unilaterally by the state, according to the income and property of taxable persons.

The fact that the law provides for deductions from acquired revenues from transfers of athletes and the amounts to be transferred by sports organizations in the budget of the IMC, respectively in the state budget, does not give grounds for expanding the range of defined by Article 60, para. .1 of the Constitution financial obligations - taxes and fees. The deduction of amounts from acquired revenues is not provided for as an obligation to the state by the Constitution. It is therefore irrelevant that the contested provision prescribes the payment of the deductions made to the budget of the MMC. Funds under it may not be raised through revenues received in a manner that is not based on constitutional principles.

The court considers that the principle of the rule of law enshrined in Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution excludes the right of the legislator to establish specific financial burdens in the form of hidden tax liabilities, as is the case with the challenged provision.

Manifestation of the constitutional principles of the rule of law and legality is compliance with the framework within which is imposed by Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution the obligation to pay only taxes and fees established by law, but not any deductions from amounts realized by activity permitted by law.

The power of the state to assign through its bodies the disputed monetary obligation is not contained in the provision of Article 52, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, which commands it to promote the development of sports and tourism. This is because the obligation of the state to “promote the development of sports and tourism” provided by the Constitution cannot be objectified by imposing by its bodies the compulsory deductions of amounts of income acquired by sports organizations, along with the obligation to pay tax. on them, which is in fact done with the disputed legal provision.

For the stated reasons the norm of art. 57a, item 2 of 3FVS contradicts the provisions of art. 4, para 1 and art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution.

This opinion on the unconstitutionality of the provision of Art. 57a, item 2 of the LFVS is also supported by the already expressed understanding of the Constitutional Court in similar cases, which it expressed with decisions № 8/1997 under c.d. № 3/1997 and № 31/1998 under c.d. № 24/1998

In view of the above and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Declares unconstitutional the norm of Art. 57a, item 2 of the Law on Physical Education and Sports, promulgated, SG, issue 58/1996, amended. and suppl., SG, issue 53/1997, issue 124/1998, issue 51/1999, issue 81/1999, issue 53/2000, issue 64 / 2000 and issue 75/2002

 

Page 1
SOLUTION № 7Sofia, October 1, 2002constitutional case № 10/2002Judge-Rapporteur Stefanka Stoyanova(Promulgated, SG No. 95 of October 8, 2002)The Constitutional Court composed of: Hristo Danov - Chairman, members: GeorgiMarkov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova,Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev,Penka Tomcheva,with the participation of Secretary-Protocol Galina Dobreva examined indoorshearing on 1 October 2002 constitutional case № 10/2002, reported byJudge Stefanka Stoyanova.The case was instituted on May 22, 2002 at the request of 48 peoplerepresentatives of the XXXIX National Assembly.The request is based on Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution. She's with himchallenged the constitutionality of the following provisions of the Law onPrivatization and Post-Privatization Control (PCPA) - SG, issue 28 of March 19, 2002d .: art.3, para.2 and 4, art.6, para.4, art.11, art.16, para.1, item 5 in the part concerning the words “regardingtheir legality ”and § 22 of the transitional and final provisions.By order of 11 June 2002, the application was granted for examination underessence and as interested parties the National Assembly is constituted,The Council of Ministers, the Minister of Economy, the Minister of Justice,Privatization Agency, Supreme Court of Cassation, Supreme CourtAdministrative Court and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria.Within the given term, all of them submitted written statements on the caseinterested parties with the exception of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme CourtAdministrative Court.The Constitutional Court discussed the request, assessed the considerationscontained therein and in the written observations submitted, and in order to rule,Consider the following:Under Art. 3, para 2 and 4 of the PCPAAccording to the request, these provisions are in contradiction with Art. 17 and Art. 140 ofThe Constitution. In contesting them, it is maintained that the regulation in them of the conditions andthe procedure regarding the adoption of a decision for privatization of municipal propertyrestricts municipalities in disposing of their property and its use ininterest of the territorial community, deprives of legal protection their right toproperty and infringes the constitutional principle of the inviolability ofprivate property.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria, in whose opinion it is pointed out that the provisions of Article 3, paragraphs 2 and 4 of the PCPAannouncement of municipal property for privatization "by law" and by"A state body such as the Privatization Agency" contradicts not onlyof art. 17 and art. 140 of the Constitution, but also of the principles of the localself-government, the rule of law and free enterprise,promulgated by Art. 2, para 1, Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 19 of the Constitution.The other opinions stated that the request was unfounded becausethe disputed para 2 and 4 of art. 3 of the PCPA, as they do not deprive the municipalities of the opportunity themselvesto determine both the property that will be announced for privatization and
Page 2
2the procedure for opening a privatization procedure does not actually restrictthe exercise of the right of ownership.The Constitutional Court finds the request in this part unfounded.The provision of art. 3, para 2 of the PCPA refers to the procedure for declaringmunicipal property for privatization. It is assigned to municipal councilsthe adoption within a specified period of two lists. One of them must coverthe municipal participation in the capital of the commercial companies, which will “be considered asannounced for privatization with the promulgation in the State Gazette of the list. INthe other should include the municipal participation that will be declared forprivatization under the conditions of Art. 3, para 3, item 2 of the PCPA - when from the municipalthe council adopts a specific decision for the respective company. Yesthe envisaged order is not inconsistent with Art. 17 and Art. 140 of the Constitution.According to Article 1, paragraph 2 of the PCPA "privatization is a transfer through sale"of the property under items 1 - 3. The actions for its implementation undoubtedly haveadministrative nature. To perform these actions are not availableintroduced any restrictions regarding the municipalities with para 2 of art. 3ZPSK. It is true that the provision provides for the adoption of those lists,the first of which, after its promulgation in the State Gazette, has the meaning ofan act initiating the privatization procedure as described thereinproperty. However, the legislation does not set any requirements for the number, type,the purpose or the assessment of the companies with municipal participation incapital to be included in the lists. And the absence in art. 3, para 2 of the PCPAof such and other requirements as far as the content of the lists providespossibility for self-determination and formation of this content bymunicipal councils as bodies of local self-government. Defining it, theythey themselves specify which companies with municipal participation in the capital willbe privatized and themselves indicate for each of the companies in which of the liststo be included. In this way, they specify the objects for privatization andthey themselves choose the order for its announcement - under para 2, sentence 1 or under para 3, item 2 of art.The autonomy they have in making decisions in this direction,allows them to report all related tothe privatization of the commercial circumstances, the consideration of which isnecessary in view of the principles of local self-government. Therefore notit can be considered that the municipalities are deprived of the opportunity to take into account yesassess the interests of the territorial community in the use of propertyyou are. Nor can the exercise of their right toproperty and, more precisely, for infringing their right to dispose of their owntheir property. Therefore, the infringement alleged by the petitioners does not existof constitutional provisions.The next disputed provision - para 4 of art. 3 PCPA, determines the body, fromwhich adopts a decision for privatization of the newly formed companies withstate or municipal participation. Its challenge is based on the understanding thatthe adoption of such decisions shall be entrusted to the Privatization Agency and tothe newly formed companies with municipal participation. This understanding does not correspond toits contents.According to Article 3, paragraph 4 of the PCPA, a decision for privatization of newly formedcompanies is accepted by the Privatization Agency only for those of them who are withstate participation. For the rest or for the newly formed companies with municipalparticipation, the decision for privatization is taken by the municipal councils. In thatnamely, in determining the authority taking the decision onprivatization, this provision does not deviate from the legislativeresolution of the same issue for the other objects of privatization, which are municipal
Page 3
3property. As with para 2 and 3, so with para 4 of art. 3 of the PCPA of the municipal councils, and notthe Privatization Agency is assigned to adopt a decision on privatizationof companies with municipal participation.In the light of the foregoing, it cannot be held that the contested provision incontradiction with art. 17, para 1 and 3 of the Constitution instead of protecting harmsthe inviolability of the private property of the municipalities and does not provide themopportunity to manage and use their property according to the requirements of140 of the Basic Law - in the interest of the territorial community.Under Article 6, paragraph 4 of the PCPAThe request maintains that Article 6, paragraph 4 of the PCPA presupposes the possibility ofchange in the practice of law enforcement, and this is unacceptable ”in the conditionsof a state governed by the rule of law ”and in violation of Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, there may be forconsequence of “favoring some buyers” by putting them inprivileged position over others ”.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria.According to the other interested parties who submitted written submissionsopinions, the request is unfounded, but could, as pointed out by the Ministerof justice, ”to consider this provision being worded more preciselyand more complete. "The Constitutional Court finds the request unfounded in this part as well.The disputed para 4 of art. 6 of the PCPA states that “The privatization bodiesannounce the reasons for changing their practice ”. It follows from its contents,that it does not introduce an explicit permission to change the practice, but only presupposesopportunity for change to occur. This possibility does not contradictthe basic principles under Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, according to whichour country is a state governed by the rule of law and in it the law creates and guarantees to allcitizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity.The regulation of the privatization activity is contained inthe law, part of the provisions of which are disputed by the request in the case.The application of this regulation by the bodies under artprivatization is inevitably accompanied by the approval of a certainpractice. A change in practice is possible. Its occurrence may be due tovarious reasons - for example, a mandatory interpretation of certainprovisions or of the incorrect application of some of the provisions ofthe privatization body itself. Whatever the specific reasonshowever, change can only be driven by the need to achieve itfull correspondence between the actual meaning and content of the respectivelegal norm, on the one hand, and its practical application, on the other.Therefore, such a change is not inherently a violation or amendment of the lawand its introduction does not depend on the existence of explicit legislationpermission. At the same time, its adoption does not mean that the functioning ofprivatization bodies is not bound and subject to the law, and that throughit may lead to a difference in the legal conditions for the operation ofbusiness entities.Assuming the possibility of a change in the practice ofthe bodies carrying out the privatization, the disputed provision obliges them toannounce the reasons for this. The obligation to disclose these groundsundoubtedly requires their explicit indication and justification. Hisimplementation prevents the acceptance by the bodies under Article 4 of the PCPA of arbitrary,unmotivated and contrary to the law change in the practice of implementation
Page 4
4of privatization. In addition, the fulfillment of the same obligation ensuresconditions for acquaintance with the existing practice by the interested parties.That is why its introduction not only does not violate the basic principles under Art. 4, para 1 andArt. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, but also creates a guarantee for conductingprivatization processes in accordance with the law.Under Art. 16, para 1, item 5 of the PCPAWith the request, the provision is challenged in the part providing “authorityof the Supervisory Board to rule on the legality of the privatizationtransactions ”. It is argued that the provision of that power is contrary to119 and art. 120 of the Constitution, by which “the right to pronounce underlegality is granted only to the courts ”.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria, the opinion of which states that in addition to Article 119 and Article 120 ofThe constitutional provision also contradicts the principle of separation of powersunder Article 8 of the Basic Law.According to the other interested parties, the request isunreasonable. The considerations set out in support of this conclusion are in the sense thatwhat is provided by Art. 16, para 1, item 5 of the PCPA is not the administration of justiceunder Art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution, and is an administrative control forlegality, the exercise of which does not obstruct the path of judicial review under120, para 1 of the Constitution.The Constitutional Court also considers the request unfounded in this part.Article 16 of the PCPA lists the powers of the Supervisory Board, whichaccording to art. 12, para 4 PCPA is a management body of the Privatization Agency.One of these powers is the approval of the privatization deals that areconcluded through a publicly announced competition or public auction and their valueexceeds the amount set out in the Agency 's Rules of Procedure forprivatization (one million levs according to art. 15, item 5 of the same regulations).The approval covers the legality of such transactions and their compliancewith the strategies approved by the National Assembly under Article 3, paragraph 7 of the PCPA. As it isnotes that the power of approval is subject to constitutional reviewof transactions regarding their legality. The exercise of this poweris not the administration of justice under Article 119, paragraph 1 and Article 120, paragraph 1 ofThe Constitution.The publicly announced competition and the public auction are part of the methods forcarrying out privatization. They are the normatively established ways totransfer of shares and separate parts of the property to the commercial onescompanies, as well as at the sites under Art. 1, para 2, item 3 of the PCPA. Except for theseproperty and sites the same methods according to art. 32, para 1 of PCPA can findapplication in case of transfer of shares.The legal framework of the publicly announced competition and the public auction asways to transfer ownership in privatization include a requirementarising from the stated authority of the Supervisory Board - for approvalon the legality of transactions above a certain value. Forthere is no constitutional obstacle to the provision of such a requirement.Conversely - insofar as it is an element of the actual composition of the transaction, the introductionit has constitutional support in para 4 of art. According to her, it is determined by lawthe regime of the objects of the state and municipal property. In viewthe content of the property right the determination of such a regime exceptthe acquisition and use undoubtedly includes the disposition.
Page 5
5Assigned to the Supervisory Board as the managing authority of the Agency forprivatization, which is explicitly authorized to control its activity (Art. 16,para 1, item 1 of the PCPA), the fulfillment of the indicated requirement ensures the exerciseof control within the administrative structure itself. Given atthe exercise of this control function approval, the presence of which with16, para 2 of the PCPA is equated and the failure to pronounce on a transaction within a certain term, noresolves a legal dispute on the legality of an administrative act and does not excludejudicial review of such an act. Therefore, it does not constitute justice. Herewhy it cannot be considered that in contradiction with art. 119, para 1 and art. 120, para 1 ofThe constitution is provided to another body instead of the courtsthe administration of justice.Under Art. 11 and § 22 of the transitional and final provisions of the PCPAThese provisions are contested only in the light of what they containbinding with a term of validity of some of the non-monetary means of payment, pwhich is eligible to make payment in the privatization of commercialcompanies with state participation in the capital, included in the adopted by the Ministerboard list. It is maintained that there is a contradiction with Art. 17, para 5 and Art. 19, para. 2 ofThe Constitution, because the provision of such a term violates the principle ofequality of economic entities and “unconstitutionally encroaches onprivate property from the patrimony of individuals ”.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria.According to the other interested parties who submitted written submissionsopinions, the request is unfounded.The Constitutional Court, in order to rule on the request in this part, tookWhereas:The validity period is set only for investment vouchers issuedunder Art. 44, para 1 of the repealed Law for transformation and privatization of state andmunicipal enterprises (LPPDOP). This period is provided for in § 22 of the transitional andthe final provisions of the PCPA. The provision providing for the time limit, norefers explicitly to Article 11 of the PCPA. There is a connection between them insofar as with11 of the PCPA, the Council of Ministers is assigned the adoption and promulgation ofa list of those state - owned commercial companies, atthe privatization of which is allowed to be paid with non-monetary means of payment,such as the indicated investment vouchers.In addition to the investment vouchers issued under Article 44, paragraph 1 of the LPPDOP (revoked),non-monetary means of payment, which allow payment under privatizationtransactions for companies under Article 11 of the PCPA, are also the others provided by law and for examplelisted in § 2 of the additional provisions of the PCPA compensation vouchers,compensation bills, housing compensation bills, government long-termbonds issued on the domestic and foreign debt of the country. Normativethe established grounds for issuing each category of non-monetary paymentsfunds is different. This may lead to a difference in the legal framework of theirsregime regarding the circle of entities that can acquire them, the terms and conditionsfor disposal, as well as setting a deadline for their validity,when, as in the present case, it has lapsed due to legislative changesthe legal basis for the issuance, acquisition, use andthe disposal of one of these categories of non-monetary means of payment.The difference is due to the unequal grounds for issuing the individualtypes of non-monetary means of payment does not mean the creation of inequalitybetween their owners. In addition, setting a deadline for validity does not
Page 6
6deprives of opportunity those who have acquired investment vouchers, but are nottransferred them under the effect of Articles 44 - 52 of the LPPDOP (revoked), to be ordered bythem. The stipulated term, along with the stipulated conditions for payment with these vouchersin the privatization of commercial companies under Article 11 of the PCPA, providestheir use and allows their owners to take action if they wishnecessary in this regard. Therefore, it cannot be considered that by introducingthe specified period of validity compulsorily and without prior and faircompensation, the rights to such non-monetary means of payment are expropriated.Therefore, the disputed provisions are not in contradiction with Art. 17, para 5 and Art. 19,para 2 of the Constitution and the request is unfounded in this part as well.Taking the view that the request is unfounded,The Constitutional Court considers that it should be rejected. Therefore, on the grounds149, para 1, item 2 of the ConstitutionHAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:Rejects the request of 48 MPs from XXXIX Narodnoassembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the following provisions ofLaw on Privatization and Post - Privatization Control (SG, issue 28 of March 19, 2002)d.): art. 3, para 2 and 4, art. 6, para 4, art. 11, art. 16, para 1, item 5 in the part as far as the words “concerningtheir legality ”and § 22 of the transitional and final provisions
Special opinion of Judge Zhivan Belchev

Subscribe decision with particular opinion into account the following considerations :

1. The provision of Article 33, Paragraph 5 of the Law on taxation income of natural persons (PIT) contrary to Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution , as such taxes are determined only according to the income and assets of individuals and not and with the introduction of “ sq . m. gross area of the respective site ” as measure of income .

The law lacks a definition of the term “ sq . m. gross area of the respective site ”.

Even and to be accepted , that is not a component of property tax , the term " gross area " on which to carry out activities under Article 31 and Article 32 PIT, is used to measure a volume of relevant activities . And then as is used as a measure of the volume of relevant activities , then this concept serves as one of the indicators in determining a direct income tax , as is the patent tax .

The gross area of the corresponding object is not able to be connected in any way with the income of individuals , which should not be taxed on income of individuals.

Obviously in this case the norm of art. 33, para 5 of the Income Tax Act does not correspond to the constitutional principles for legality of the tax obligations , referred to in art. 60, para 1 and 2 and art. 84, item 3 of the Constitution .

2. The provision of art. 33, para 5 of the Income Tax Act does not correspond to the constitutional principle for equal legal conditions for economic activity of the natural and legal persons , enshrined in art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution .

The tax levy is one of the conditions , which provides and guarantees equal conditions for economic activity . The principle of equality before the law has been the subject of consideration in a number of decisions of the Constitutional Court .

The provision in question creates inequality between tax subjects .

In this case, the indicator “ sq . m. The gross area of the corresponding object " no would could not be attributable to the volume of expected income , as always from larger facility is expected to be received more income and vice versa . ( Example : workshop for trade , production and services for articles of precious metals , ie " Goldsmith's workshop " and workshop for carpentry or upholstery services .)

3. In the absence of a legal definition of the term “ sq . m. The gross area of the corresponding object " to create conditions for different interpretations of this concept of country of tax administrations in places , which leads , on the other hand , and to the creation of conditions for corruption .

 
Special opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov

I signed the decision on c.d. № 7/2002 with a special opinion, because I consider that the provision of art. 33, para 5 of the Personal Income Tax Act (PITA), promulgated, SG, issue 110 of 2001, is unconstitutional.

The provision stipulates that for the activities listed in it the annual (patent) tax is determined by adding to the amount determined by the order of art. 31 BGN 5 per sq.m of gross area of ​​the respective site.

The criterion "sq.m gross area" is inherent in property taxes, not income taxes. Although in the disputed provision it is used as a natural indicator of presumed income, the criterion “sq.m. gross area ”directly participates in determining the final amount of the income patent tax. The separate indication in Art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution of “income and property” must be understood as requiring a distinction between income and property taxes, for non-admission of elements inherent in one category of taxes in the other category of taxes (Decision № 9 of 20 June 1996 under Code of Civil Procedure № 9/96, promulgated, SG, issue 58 of 1996). The disputed Article 35, paragraph 5 of the Income Tax Act is not in compliance with Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

Gross area is not always equally related to the income of service providers. For example, in order to realize the same income, different professions need a technologically different area. Watch services (Art. 31, item 7, letter “k”), trade and services for articles of precious metals (Art. 31, item 7, letter “c”) need a smaller area compared to carpentry (Art. 31, item 7, letter “a”), upholstery (Art. 31, item 7, letter “l”) and car repair services (Art. 31, item 7, letter “m” of the Income Tax Act). In order to realize an equal income, the persons who perform carpentry, upholstery and car repair services necessarily use a larger area, due to which they will pay a higher patent tax compared to the performers of watchmaking services and those for precious metal products. The practically performing services under Art. 31, item 7, letters “a”, “c”, “k” and “m” of the Income Tax Act are placed in unequal conditions. This violates the provision of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, which requires the law to create and guarantee to all citizens equal legal conditions for economic activity. Taxation is one of these legal conditions, as stated in Decision № 6 of 19.03.1998 under c.d. № 4/98, promulgated, SG No. 35/1998

 
Special opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

No I agree with the decision of the Constitutional Court , according to which Article 33, paragraph 5 of the Act on taxation of income of physical persons - a new , prom . SG br.110 of 2001, not is unconstitutional . According to me the text contrary to Article 19, Paragraph 2, Article 60 and Article 84, item 3 of the Constitution . The considerations I have the following :

The new paragraph 5 to Article 33 of the Law on taxation of income of natural persons (PIT), established by § 11 of the Law on amendment and supplement of the Law for taxation of income of natural persons , provided , that the annual ( patent ) tax for activities , referred to in Article 31, item 6 letters "a" and "b", p.7 letters "a", "b", "c", "d", "k", "l", " m "," to "," x "," z "and" yu " is determined , as to the amount , determined by the order of 31, are added at 5 lev of kvadraten metar " gross area of the corresponding object . " In Decision № 6/1998 on a k.d . № 4/98, the ( prom ., SG br.35 of '98) , the Constitutional Court has stated , that " constitutional principles , of which have to comply with tax rules , including the requirement for establishment of taxes and determining the amount to them by the National assembly ”. This follows from Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution . Only with the law , and not with any and to any regulatory act of another state body , they can not be certain . This is also the case according to Article 84, item 3 of the Constitution , according to which the National Assembly not only establishes taxes , but also determines their amount . In that decision , the Constitutional Court accepted , that " a law is to be certain all indicators , through which can not be individualized rate of tax for each tax entity ." In the same sense, it is the decision № 9/1996 on a k.d . № 9/96 ( promulgated , SG, issue 58 of 96). The provisions challenged before the Constitutional Court do not define the concept of “ gross area of the respective site ”. Extracting him in argument from the opposite of the concept of " net trading area " consumed in § 1, item 18 of the additional provisions of PITA, not able to play the role of accurately and uniformly specified benchmark for all parties , subject to taxation with patent tax . There are no instructions in the law who and on what grounds will determine the " gross area of the site ". Could a different tax offices to put a different meaning in the concept of gross area of the site . So can not be seen inequality between the one and the same taxpayer , carrying one and the same activity . And this is contrary to Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution . Inequality in anticipated earnings , which are the basis for the amount of patent taxation , is increasing and by the fact , that the activities , for the implementation of which is required undoubtedly greater area , are taxed uniformly with a 5 lev . of kv.m . gross area more , as and activities , for the exercise of which is required much less space . So it will be even when a hypothesis of both activities is get one and the same income . Different professions according to their technological features require the use of different areas . From one space is needed as a watchmaker ( referred to in Article 31, paragraph 7, letter "k" PITA) and by another one upholsterer or mechanic ( referred to in Article 31, paragraph 7, letter "l" and " m ”ZODFL).

It can be noted at this , that for a number of activities , in essence similar to those , for which is required increase at 5 lev . per sq . m. gross area , no such increase is envisaged .

This is the case, for example, with barber services (Article 31, paragraph 1, letter "f"), typewriting services (Article 31, paragraph 1, letter "g"), cosmetic services (Article 31, paragraph 1, letter " h ") and others . The law does not contain a logical criterion , on the basis of which to become the additional taxation of square . m area . This is contrary to Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution , so as not create equal conditions for economic activity in patent taxed .

Besides the above it is to be noted , that according to Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution citizens are obliged to pay taxes according to their income and property . From what has been said above is visible , that the increase of the patent tax on the disputed law is not able always to be connected to all activities with income from the used larger area . The tax is not in line for everyone with their expected income . As is concerned , however, by the size of the area outside income , then it is an element of tax on property and not from income tax .

 
JUDGMENT № 8
Sofia, 8 October 2002
constitutional case № 7/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Dimitar Gochev
(Promulgated, SG No. 97 of 15 October 2002) 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Dimitar Gochev - Rapporteur, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on April 12, 2002 at the request of the President of the Republic of Bulgaria to establish the unconstitutionality of Article 33, paragraph 5 of the Personal Income Tax Act (PITA) - new, promulgated, SG, no. 110 of 2001

The request alleges that the attacked text contradicts Article 60, paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 and Article 84, item 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The term “gross area of ​​the respective site”, used in the text and expressing the tax base, was not defined in the additional provisions of the law. In addition, the "gross area of ​​the respective site" is an element of property tax and is inadmissibly used to determine the amount of income tax, such as the patent tax.

By order of 21 May 2002, the Constitutional Court granted the application on the merits.

The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the National Audit Office, the Bulgarian Chamber of Crafts, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce constituted as interested parties in the case. Interested parties were given the opportunity to make their views known in writing.

By letter dated 31 May 2002, the National Assembly sent its opinion, prepared and adopted by the Committee on Budget and Finance.

The Council of Ministers sent its opinion by letter dated 20 June 2002, the Minister of Finance by letter dated 11 June 2002.

These three statements support the thesis that the impugned text does not contradict the basic law. It is pointed out that the final patent tax is not tied to the amount of income received from the tax debtor, but to the implementation of the activity referred to in the law. The final annual patent tax is a direct income tax, but its amount is determined not on the basis of real, but on estimated income. "Square meter gross area" is an indicator related to the expected income, as it takes into account the scale of the respective activity from which the income is realized.

The observations of the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry - sent by letter dated 5 June 2002, to the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce - letter dated 4 June 2002, support the arguments set out in the request - for the unconstitutionality of the impugned text. It is pointed out that the concept of "gross area of ​​the respective site" is not clarified by law and this violates the requirement by law to determine all elements of the tax.

In an additional opinion of 5 June 2002, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria stated that the impugned text contradicted the constitutional principle of fairness in determining tax liabilities because the introduction of an additional tax related to gross area violated the principle of relative equality of tax subjects. This criterion has nothing to do with the criterion "functional type of settlement", which is the basis of the organization of patent taxation.

By letter of 4 June 2002, the Bulgarian Chamber of Crafts also upheld the request, arguing that the additional criterion introduced by the impugned text concerned a property tax which the patent tax was not.

The Constitutional Court, considering the considerations set forth in the request of the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, as well as the opinions of the parties involved, in order to rule, took into account the following:

The taxes shall be established and their amount shall be determined by the National Assembly, in accordance with Article 84, item 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. Moreover, tax liabilities can be determined only by law, as indicated in Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Basic Law.

This constitutional principle is also indicated in the decisions of the Constitutional Court № 3 under c.d. № 2 of 1996 and № 6 under c.d. № 4 of 1998

The Constitution defines two categories of taxes - according to whether they are based on the property of taxable persons or on the basis of their income (Article 60, paragraph 1). As accepted by the Constitutional Court in Decision № 9 under c.d. № 9 of 1996 it is inadmissible to use the elements that determine the amount of taxes of one category in determining the amount of the other category of taxes.

The attacked provision of Art. 33, item 5 of the Income Tax Act determines an additional amount of the due patent tax by the persons performing activities under Art. 31, item 6, letters “a” and “b”, item 7, b. “A”, “b”, “c”, “e”, “k”, “l”, “m”, “c”, “x”, “щ” and “ю”, as to the basic size adds BGN 5 per square meter of gross area for the respective site.

The basic final annual (patent) tax according to the provision of art. 31 of the Income Tax Act is determined in the amount of a fixed amount depending on the type of activity performed by the taxable subject, respective categorization of the activity (object), functional type of settlements, zones, number jobs and other indicators.

The general characteristic for determining the amount of the final annual (patent) tax is that they are an indication of the intensity of the respective activity and hence - presumed, expected income.

The amount of the used area for carrying out the respective activity is connected with a precondition for the possible turnover (volume of performed activity) and hence higher or lower income.

This indicator obviously refers to the respective income and is used precisely to determine the amount of an income tax, such as the final annual (patent) tax.

The term “gross area for the respective site”, used by the legislator as a determination of the tax base for the additional amount of the annual (patent) tax, is not really defined in an additional provision of the law, as it is done with the term “net commercial area” in § 1, item 18 of the additional provisions of SITA. However, the Court finds that this does not violate the constitutional requirement of Art. 60, para 1 and 2 and Art. 84, item 3 that taxes be determined by the National Assembly, and by law (see also Decision № 3 of CC under Code of Civil Procedure № 2 of 1996), including all their elements.

The lack of a definition of the term by which the legislator determines the tax base does not mean that the base is not determined by law. If in the application of the law there is a need to clarify the concept of "gross area of ​​the site", this concept can be interpreted. (Such an interpretation should not create a problem in the presence of the definition in § 1, item 18 of the additional provisions of the Income Tax Act of the term “net commercial area”.)

The term used (“gross area of ​​the respective object”) for determining the additional amount of the patent tax is not an element of property tax. The gross area on which the activities under Art. 31 and Art. 32 of the Income Tax Act are carried out is used, as indicated, as a measure of the volume of the respective activity, and not as an indication of the value of property owned by the taxable person.

The Constitutional Court held that the principle of a fair amount of taxes, enshrined in Article 61, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, was not violated.

With the attacked text the legislator has determined an additional amount of income tax in accordance with its competence under Article 84, item 3 and in accordance with the requirements of Article 60, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution.

Therefore, the Constitutional Court finds that the provision of Article 33, paragraph 5 of the Income Tax Act does not contradict the Basic Law of the Republic of Bulgaria, therefore on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and Art. 14, para 2 of the Constitutional Court Act

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of the President of the Republic of Bulgaria to establish the unconstitutionality of Article 33, paragraph 5 of the Personal Income Tax Act - new, promulgated, SG No. 110/2001.

Special opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

I signed with a special opinion the decision on c.d. № 15/2002, because I believe that the Law on Amendments to the Law on International Commercial Arbitration (AMLTA) is completely unconstitutional. Outside § 3, para 1 of its transitional provision in its part with the content “cancels the imposed precautionary measures”, which in the decision was correctly declared unconstitutional, the other provisions of the law also contradict the Constitution in my opinion. My considerations are the following:

1. The filing of the claim for annulment of an arbitral award before the Supreme Court of Cassation as a single instance affects the right to defense - Article 56 of the Constitution, Article 122 of the Constitution and Article 124 of the Constitution. Granting the resolution of a civil dispute to only one court, without the possibility of control over its decision, does not create a guarantee of a full right of defense. This is also the case when the only instance is the Supreme Court of Cassation. The enumeration of the courts in Art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution does not mean that every process must necessarily develop in three instances (in this sense, see Decision № 16/98 under Code of Civil Procedure № 7/98). ., promulgated, SG, issue 71/98 and Decision № 27/98 under cd № 20/98, promulgated, SG, issue 121/98). However, one should take into account the special position occupied by the Supreme Court of Cassation among the other judicial bodies in view of Article 124 of the Constitution. Its function is above all to "exercise supreme judicial supervision over the accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts". According to Zhivko Stalev (Bulgarian Civil Procedure Law, 2001, p. 510) "our cassation appeal is a means to achieve, in the words of Article 124 of the Constitution, accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts."

The submission to the Supreme Court of Cassation of the award of a claim procedure, such as the annulment of an arbitral award under Article 47 of the LTA, directly contradicts the function that this court has. The lack of possibility for control over his decision does not provide full protection of the citizen, as required by the reason that the constitutional legislator has invested in Article 56 and Article 122 of the Constitution. On the other hand, this does not make it possible to carry out the supreme judicial supervision provided for in Article 124 of the Constitution for accurate and uniform application of the laws.

It should be borne in mind that the arbitral award differs significantly from the rulings of the state courts. It is issued by a non-governmental body and therefore each legislator approaches it specifically. Although Article 47 of the LTA lists the grounds for revocation, as does Article 231 of the Civil Procedure Code, until § 1 of the LRA the revocation took place with a claim filed before the Sofia City Court. According to Zhivko Stalev (cited above, p. 679) precisely because the arbitral award is a private and not a state act, "its annulment takes place by way of a claim, and not by appeal or extraordinary means of annulment against entered into force court decisions." . This is according to Stalev, because "the issues raised by the annulment of the arbitral award are delicate and require control by appellate and cassation" (cited above, p. 680).

For these reasons and legislation of a number of European member states and associated with the European Union provide for two-instance proceedings for the annulment of arbitral awards, which ensures the control of their supreme courts (eg, Article 75 of the English Arbitration Act, Article 831 and Art. 840 of the Italian Code of Civil Procedure, Article 1062 and Article 1065 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Federal Republic of Germany, Article 1482 of the French Code of Civil Procedure, the Romanian Code of Civil Procedure). Only the Swiss Federal Law on Private International Law of 18 December 1987 (Article 191, paragraph 1) provides for the annulment of arbitral awards in international cases by the Federal Court. The two-stage procedure adopted by the member states of the European Union meets the requirements for better judicial protection and better administration of justice.

There is no precedent under our current law to accept a single-instance claim procedure in civil cases. In order not to violate the right to protection and control over the judicial acts and the amendments to the PPC (SG, issue 70/99), with § 14 (art. 23, para 4) they removed the consideration of the criminal cases for persons with judicial immunity. and ministers before the Sofia City Court.

2. The above-stated contradictions of § 1 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Constitution require that both the provisions of § 2 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights texts that, in my opinion, contradict the Constitution.

 
JUDGMENT № 9 Sofia, 24 October 2002 constitutional case № 15/2002 Judge-Rapporteur Penka Tomcheva (Promulgated, SG No. 102 of 1 November 2002)  




Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva - Rapporteur

In accordance with Art. 150, para 1 and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria by the Supreme Court of Cassation (SCC), the General Assembly of the Civil Collegium was requested to declare the Constitutional Court unconstitutional. Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for international commercial arbitration (AMLTA), promulgated in SG, issue 46/2002

The request disputes § 1 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights and § 3, paragraph 1 of the transitional provision of the law. Given the conditionality of the other provisions of § 2 and § 3, para 2 of the disputed § 1 and § 3, para 1, it is requested to declare the entire law unconstitutional.

According to the petitioners, § 1, which amended Article 47 of the International Commercial Arbitration Act (IBAA), promulgated, SG, issue 60/88, amended, issue 93/93, issue 59/98, no. 38/2001, is unconstitutional. The assignment of the SCC functions to a single instance on a claim for annulment of an arbitral award on the above 6 grounds violates "the instance of the process and the related guarantees for the right to protection of citizens and legal entities - Article 56 in connection with Article 122, para 1 of the Constitution ”. Considerations are also set forth for contradiction with Art. 119, para 1 and Art. 124 of the Constitution, which define the Supreme Court of Cassation only as a court of review. It is alleged that after the amendment the Supreme Court of Cassation "could not ensure the unity of its own practice as a guarantee of security and predictability in law enforcement, which refers to Article 124 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria."

§ 3, para 1 of the transitional provision by law prescribes to a judicial body to revoke its determinations for admission of collateral on claims under art. 47 of the LTA. This violates the constitutional principles and norms for the separation of powers (Art. 8), for the independence of the judiciary (Art. 117, para. 2) and for the right to defense (Art. 56 and Art. 122, para. 1). .

By order of 12.09.2002 request was granted substantive examination and are constituted as stakeholders National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, Minister of Justice, Court of Arbitration at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce, Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and the Supreme Bar Council . They submitted written observations, which are discussed separately in the following statement.

І. Preliminary remarks

The Law on International Commercial Arbitration, adopted in 1988 (promulgated, SG No. 60/88) in the part for annulment of an arbitral award (Articles 47, 48 et seq.), Has been amended in the following directions: 47, para 1 of the LTA of 1988 provides for the possibility of annulment of an arbitral award “by the Sofia City Court by way of a claim” in the presence of any of five grounds, and paragraph 2 of the same provision entitles the court on its own initiative to declare the decision null and void when, during the examination of the case, it finds that the subject matter of the dispute is not subject to arbitration or that the decision contradicts the public order of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. Article 48 of the law provides for a three-month term for filing the claim and excludes the possibility for review by the order of supervision in accordance with the then existing procedural regulations. In 2001, paragraph 2 was repealed and its content was included as the sixth ground for annulment. If the parties do not request revocation within the three-month period, the arbitral award shall enter into force.

With the disputed amendment of Art. 47 of the LTA, another procedural form for judicial control over arbitral awards has been adopted - revocation by the Supreme Court of Cassation, as the three-month term under Art. Paragraphs 2 and 3 provide for the suspension of the execution of the arbitral award as a precautionary measure to be allowed only by the Supreme Court of Cassation against presentation of security in the amount of the interest from the annulment of the arbitral award (para 2) and state fee determined in accordance with Article 54 and Article 55 of the Civil Procedure Code. From Article 49 of the LTA, which is not disputed, it is understood that if the state court with an effective decision overturns the arbitral award on any of the grounds under Article 47, items 1, 2 or 3, the interested party may file a claim in the dispute. before the competent state court, and when the arbitral award is revoked on any of the grounds under Article 47, items 4, 5 or 6, the state court shall return the case to the arbitral tribunal for a new hearing.

On the basis of these preliminary remarks, in considering the request, the views of the interested parties in relation to the constitutional provisions allegedly violated, the Constitutional Court accepts the following:

ІІ. For the alleged unconstitutionality of § 1 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

According to most of the interested parties, § 1 of the Act does not contradict constitutional provisions.

The National Assembly states that this is a specific, claim, single-instance procedure for control of an effective judicial act of a non-governmental institution, where the Supreme Court of Cassation will not consider the disputes on the merits, but will act as a control and reversal instance of the arbitral award.

The Council of Ministers maintains that the amendment brings the protection against decisions of the Arbitration Court closer to the protection against court decisions that have entered into force, insofar as the claim for annulment of an arbitration decision and the proceedings under Article 231 of the CPC are submitted to the SCC. In contrast to the alleged violation of the right to defense, he referred to Article 49 of the LTA.

The Minister of Justice, for his part, argues that the exceptions to the principled and predominant three-instance proceedings are not unconstitutional once they have been introduced to ensure procedural values ​​such as speed, procedural discipline and procedural economy.

The Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry especially emphasizes that the single instance and jurisdiction of the SCC in this category of claims is related to the legal nature of the disputes and that the grounds for annulment provided for in Article 47 do not affect elements of the parties' substantive dispute. . Similar decisions are indicated in other laws.

The Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce also considers that there is no constitutional obstacle to assigning the examination of first instance cases to the Supreme Court of Cassation, as well as the judicial consideration of cases to be carried out in less than three instances.

The opinion of the Supreme Bar Council is in the opposite sense: it follows from Article 119, paragraph 1 of the Constitution that the examination of criminal and civil cases is carried out in three instances. The amendment expands the scope of powers of the Supreme Court of Cassation beyond the limits of Article 124 of the Constitution.

The disputed § 1 of ZIDZMTA, resp. Article 47 of the LTA amended by it does not contradict constitutional provisions.

1. Parliamentary materials - report of the Committee on Legal Affairs, proposals of the members of the committee, the stenographic minutes of the plenary sittings (NA, № 253-03-23 ​​/ 23.04.2002, 39th NA, stenographic diaries, book 32, p.114 et seq., book 35, p.44 et seq.), show unanimity in accepting the amendment to art. 47 of the LTA and the related motives for rationalization, speed and stabilization of the whole arbitration process. The amendment concerns only the part concerning the court - the Supreme Court of Cassation, which is competent to rule on a request for annulment of vicious arbitral awards and accessory issues related to the changed jurisdiction . The formal constitutional requirements for discussion and adoption of the amendments have been met.

2. From the provision of art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution, listing the types of courts, which administer justice, no conclusion can be made for a constitutional requirement for obligatory three-instance proceedings in all cases (Decision № 16 / 16.06.1998). under Code of Civil Procedure / 7/98, SG, issue 71/98, Decision № 27 / 15.10.1998 under Code of Civil Procedure № 20/98, SG, issue 121/98 d.). The issues of the court instances are settled in the structural, procedural and other laws, containing procedural rules. The constitutional provision of Article 133, according to which the organization and activity of the courts are regulated by law, points to this. There can hardly be any doubt that the instance is an element related to the organization and activity of the courts. The prevailing tri-instance established by the criminal and civil procedural laws is not bound by constitutional imperatives. Therefore, there is no constitutional obstacle with another law, different from the procedural ones, to be established for some disputable legal relations different from the instance generally accepted by the PPC and CPC.

The petitioners connect the violation of Art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution with the name of the court used there, as “Supreme Court of Cassation”, and “by definition the cassation instance is a control-revocation court”. This argument is also not convincing that the assignment of the Supreme Court of Cassation to rule on the annulment of arbitral awards violates the said constitutional provision. The new content of Article 47 of the LTA, given the preserved specific grounds for revocation, relating only to arbitration proceedings, in fact assigns to the SCC along with control and revocation functions and those related to the first instance proceedings, without entering into substantive relations between the parties. This follows both from the nature of the grounds for revocation and from the undisputed Article 49 of the LTA.

3. The provision of Article 56 of the Constitution provides guarantees related to the right to protection of citizens in case of violation or threat to their rights and legitimate interests, and Article 122, paragraph 1 of the Constitution details the right to protection of citizens and legal entities, when they are necessary for reasons related to the activity of the judiciary. The constitutionally regulated by Art. 122, para 1 judicial protection of the citizens and the legal entities refers to all stages of the process.

The disputed legislative decision with the amendment of art. 47 of the LTA does not contradict the indicated constitutional provisions.

Protection against the decisions rendered in arbitration proceedings is precisely the protection before the state court under the procedure and on the specific grounds for the arbitration proceedings under Article 47 of the LTA. The fact that this protection is realized in one instance - the Supreme Court of Cassation, does not limit the right to defense. Although outside the “judiciary”, the rules for proceedings before an arbitral tribunal established by the LTA place it at the level of a kind of “stage of the process” within the meaning of Article 122, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, where the protection under Article 47 of the LTA is the next stage. From this point of view, insofar as Art. 122, para 1 in fine means that there is always more than one stage of the process, the protection within the arbitration process in its entirety is provided in two stages: before the non-state, arbitration and before the state court. . Here, too, it is not insignificant to note that in case of annulment of the arbitral award by the Supreme Court of Cassation in the proceedings under Article 47 of the LTA, the interested party has open opportunities for defense before the state court or retrial by the arbitral tribunal, depending on the grounds on which the vicious arbitration award was revoked, as follows from the undisputed Article 49 of the LTA. This provision confirms the provision of the constitutionally necessary conditions for the full realization of the right to protection of citizens and legal entities: initially before the arbitral tribunal, if necessary after it before the Supreme Court of Cassation and if the latter annuls the arbitral award under Art.

4. The Constitution in Art. 124 outlines the general and most essential task of the Supreme Court of Cassation to “exercise supreme judicial supervision for accurate and equal application of the laws by all courts”. The said obligation for the Supreme Court of Cassation cannot be delegated to another court by law precisely because it is assigned only to it by the basic law. However, it does not necessarily follow that the Supreme Court of Cassation is constitutionally prohibited from carrying out other activities assigned by law related to the administration of justice. A typical example in support of the above is Article 81, paragraph 2 of the Judiciary Act (JSA), promulgated, SG No. 59/94, amended, SG No. 74/2002, according to which the Supreme Court of Cassation resolves jurisdictional disputes when a party to them is a court of appeal.

The judicial activity assigned to the Supreme Court of Cassation with the disputed amendment to consider the claims under Art. 47 of the LTA, in which the typical control and revocation functions are preserved without being able to resolve substantive disputes on the merits (argument of Art. 49 of the LTA), does not contradict Art. .124 of the Constitution.

III. For the unconstitutionality of § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of ZIDZMTA

According to the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice and the Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce, the provision does not contradict the Constitution.

The Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry considers that § 3, para. city ​​court to annul the precautionary measures imposed by him.

The Supreme Bar Council has not expressed an opinion on the matter.

The disputed § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of the law contains rules for the court cases, unfinished, without final decisions, before the Sofia City Court, formed during the operation of the previous regulation. The content is as follows: “Articles 47 and 48 shall also apply to existing proceedings for annulment of arbitral awards. In these cases, the Sofia City Court shall, within two weeks of the entry into force of this law, terminate the proceedings before it, revoke the imposed precautionary measures and send the case for consideration by the Supreme Court of Cassation. ”

The provision is unconstitutional only in the part by which it orders the Sofia City Court to revoke the precautionary measures imposed by it. In violation of Art. 8 of the Constitution for Separation of Powers and Art. 117, para. 2 of the Constitution for the Independence of the Judiciary, the legislature itself predestines the fate of judicial acts by which appropriate precautionary measures have been imposed and , ordered the independent body of the judiciary, in this case the Sofia City Court to revoke the precautionary measures. The court is deprived of its inherent function to decide because, apart from annulling it, the legislature has not given it any other option.

With the indicated part of the provision of § 3, para 1 PR of ZIDZMTA the right to protection of the citizens under art. 56, and of them, and of the legal entities under art. 122, para 1 of the Constitution is unconstitutionally violated. In the period after the repeal of the precautionary measures ordered by law by the Sofia City Court until the enactment of new ones by the Supreme Court of Cassation, the property interests of the interested parties are deprived of the protection of the collateral.

In the remaining part § 3, para 1 of the PR of ZIDZMTA, for which considerations for unconstitutionality are not presented by the petitioners, duly regulates how to deal with the pending cases on which no effective decision has been rendered.

The unconstitutional part of § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of the law does not change the meaning of the remaining part, resp. the meaning of the entire contested law, in which case it should continue to operate.

For the stated reasons the Constitutional Court on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria

RESOLVED:

Declares unconstitutional § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for international commercial arbitration, promulgated, SG, issue 46/2002, in the part with the following content: “cancels the imposed precautionary measures” .

Dismisses in the remainder the request of the Supreme Court of Cassation, General Assembly of the Civil Collegium to declare unconstitutional the entire Law on Amendments to the Law on International Commercial Arbitration.


to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on
constitutional case Mo 11 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of April 24, 2001, we were constituted as
interested party in constitutional case Me 11 for 2001,
formed at the request of 51 MPs from the 38th National Assembly
meeting to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 52, para. 6
of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP).

According to the group of MPs, Art. 52, para. 6 of the ZINP,
according to which the Prime Minister and Ministers continue
the exercise of their powers and after their registration as
candidates for MPs, contrary to Art. 65, para. 2, on
Art. Article 10 6, para. 2 of the Constitution.

1. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of art. 52, para. 6 from
ZINP with Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution

The assessment regarding the compliance of Art. 52, para. 6 of ZINP with art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution requires clarification of the content of
the term “civil service” within the meaning of this constitutional text.
At the request of a group of MPs, the Constitutional Court
brought proceedings in Mo 9 for 2001 for mandatory interpretation of the text in

meaning "whether>" the Prime Minister, "| Deputy Minister-
the chairmen and the ministers hold civil service within the meaning of Art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria ”. The Council of Ministers
is constituted as an interested party in the case and in the determinations of
the court term has submitted an opinion with its considerations. As
The Constitutional Court has not ruled on the request and has not entered
force decision, we believe that we should set out our considerations in this as well
position.

Conclusion on the content of the term “civil service” c
the meaning in which it is used in Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, may
to be made from what is stated in the reasons to Decision Me 5 of 1993 on
Constitutional Case Mo 6 of 1993, which states:

“In the Constitution, apart from Art. 68, para. 1 for civil service
speaks in Art. 65, para. 2. The concept is the basis of the provision of art.
116. It is common ground that the term 'civil service' must be understood as
unified and consistent meaning. In general, this is an activity
performing the functions of the state. This activity is performed
on behalf of the state and to exercise the powers provided for
in the Constitution its organs. "

The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in a Decision
Me 16 of 1997 on constitutional case Me 8 of 1997.

We fully share the opinion of the Constitutional Court
on the unified and consistent meaning of the term “state
service ”as an activity for performing the functions of the state,
which is done on behalf of the state and for implementation
the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution. The activity,
carried out by the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister,
presidents and ministers as sole bodies of state power and
as members of the highest collegial body of the executive power
it is indisputably an activity for the performance of the functions of the state which
they perform on behalf of the state and to exercise their powers
of its constitutional bodies. Therefore, they occupy the state
service within the meaning set out in the grounds of the decision of

The Constitutional Court. However, to determine whether occupied by them
civil service is included in the scope of the term “civil service” under
Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, it is necessary to assess not only
the nature of their activity, as well as the constitutional law
status of the Council of Ministers and its members. This also follows
from the reasons in the cited decision of the Constitutional Court, in which
says:

“.. in the absence of an unambiguous doctrinal or legal
definition of civil service the meaning and content of
the concept in individual cases must be disclosed in accordance with
the specific objectives of the regulations and the institutes to which it relates ...
However, this most general meaning of the term "civil service" does not exclude
and the peculiarities with which it is used in the Constitution and which it
acquires depending on its specific systematic place and from
the relevant legal institute with which it is directly related. Not possible
for example, to have an absolute coincidence in scope of the concept in Art. 68, para.
You art. 116. The logical and systematic interpretation of the two texts
leads to the conclusion that in Art. 116 refers to only one type of state
service - in the sphere of the executive power, of the state
administration in the proper sense of the word. While in Art. 68, para. 1 is available
given the wider scope of the concept. (The discrepancy from the point of view of
volume does not mean a contradiction in the general sense of the term, it
expresses only the differences between the types of civil service).

Clarification of the meaning of the term “civil service” under Art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution in view of the constitutional status of
The Council of Ministers and its members, regulated in Chapter Five of
The Constitution, in our opinion, imposes the conclusion that this concept does not include
the posts of “the Prime Minister, <| Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers.

According to Chapter Five of the Constitution, ministers are sole proprietors
executive bodies, which are also members of
the collegial body of the executive power - the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers as a collegial body composed of

the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers,
manages and implements the domestic and foreign policy of the country,
ensures public order and national security, implements
the general management of the state administration and the Armed Forces,
directs the implementation of " state budget, organized
the management of the state property, concludes, approves and
denounce international treaties in the cases provided by law.

The members of the Council of Ministers receive their powers,
which the Constitution and laws connect only with them, through
their election by the National Assembly as provided for in the Constitution
ed. The Prime Minister is also a member of the Council of Ministers
directs and coordinates the general policy of the government and carries
responsibility for it, the deputy prime ministers and ministers are
members of the Council of Ministers and are responsible for their actions.
The powers of the Council of Ministers cannot be obtained in this way
to transfer to another. Ministers may, by order, delegate to
Deputy Ministers powers and determine their functions (Art.
26, para. 2 of the Administration Act), but they cannot delegate to them
powers which fall within their exclusive competence under
The Constitution and the laws. This applies above all to power
to be members of the Council of Ministers and to participate in the formation
at the will of the collegial body.

As stated in the request that the exit of the ministers and the
the prime minister on leave during the election campaign does not
leaves the state without a government, is true only insofar as going out in
leave means the cessation of functions, not
termination of powers. If we accept the interpretation that Art. 65,
al. 2 of the Constitution requires unconditionally the Prime Minister,
Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers to> terminate
performing its functions after registering to participate as
candidates in the election, this would mean accepting that Constitution
allows and even demands during the election campaign the state
to have a government that cannot fulfill its obligations to

supreme collegial body of the executive power due to contained in
the Constitution itself prohibits its members from performing
its functions. This would also mean that the constitutional and
the legal functions of the Prime Minister, Deputy Minister
the presidents and ministers remain without a medium during this period
and will not be implemented in practice. And the features that
The Constitution assigns the government are of a nature that does not
allows them to be interrupted at any time. Apparently this conclusion
is also shared by the constitutional legislator, who has created an explicit
regulation in such a sense - Art. 111, para. 3 of the Constitution provides that when
termination of the powers of the Council of Ministers and upon submission of
resignation before the newly elected National Assembly Council of Ministers
continues to perform its functions until a new one is selected
Council of Ministers. Since the Constitution does not allow interruption of
the performance of the functions of the Council of Ministers even in the hypothesis
of terminated powers under Art. 111 of the Constitution, there is none
reason to claim that it not only allows, but even requires such
interruption during the operation of the powers of
The Council of Ministers, as is the case under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution.

The constitutional requirement of Art. 65, para. 2 was played
incl. 49, para. 1 of the repealed Law on Election of Members of Parliament,
municipal councilors and mayors. By Decision of 13 September 1991 on
the legal status of the members of the Council of Ministers who registered
as candidates in parliamentary elections (SG, issue 80 of 1991),
The Grand National Assembly accepted that the provision of Art. 49, para. 1 of
ZINPOSK does not cover the Prime Minister, Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers and that their powers continue to
are also performed after the registration for participation in the elections
due to the special status of the Council of Ministers as a supreme central council
constitutional body of the executive power. In Decision Mo 2 of 1991.
of the Constitutional Court in constitutional case Me 24 for 1991 on the occasion
this decision of the Grand National Assembly reads:

"In connection with the elections for MPs, municipal
councilors and mayors held on October 13, 1991, the People's
assembly with a decision of 13 September 1991 reasonably accepted that Art. 49
ZINPOSK does not apply to the members of the Ministerial
advice if they participate in the election, as in view of the functions and
the responsibilities of its members the country cannot be left without
incumbent government. ”

The perception of the conclusion that in the scope of the term “state
service ”under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution does not include the positions of
the Prime Minister, "| Deputy Prime Minister and
ministers, means that the imperative requirement of the constitutional
text does not apply to the persons holding the said posts and
therefore there is no contradiction between Art. 52, para. 6 of ZINP and Art. 65,
al. 2 of the Constitution.

2. Regarding the allegation of contradiction of art. 52, para. 6 from
ZINP with Art. Article 10 6, para. 2 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, the actual implementation
of the functions of the ministers and of the prime minister
inequality between them and the other candidates, which violated Art.
Article 10 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. The request does not state any arguments
MPs substantiate these claims.

According to Art. 10 of the Constitution, the elections are held on
based on universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot, a
according to art. 6, para. 2 all citizens are equal before the law and are not
allow no restrictions on rights or privileges based on
social status and others exhaustively listed in the text
signs.

The perception of the above that the constitutional
the legislator has excluded the posts of the Prime Minister,
the Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers in the circle of persons,
who are obliged to terminate the performance of their occupation
civil service, means that he has taken into account all the consequences of
exclusion and has foreseen and allowed this result. Therefore if

Art. 52, para. 6 of ZINP does not contradict art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, no
may seek a contradiction between the legal text and Art. 6, para. 2 and art. 10
of the Constitution, as the regulation in Art. 65, para. 2 is special on
regarding the regulation in art. b, para. 2 ивчл. 10.

Nevertheless, we do not consider that there are serious arguments in
support the claim that the expulsion of the Prime Minister,
Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers of the Circle of
obliged to terminate the performance of the occupied civil service
creates inequalities between candidates based on
their social status or on another grounds specified in Art. 6, para. 2
of the Constitution. The requirement to remove candidates from
the occupied civil service is focused on the one hand on insurance
of political neutrality in the performance of this service, which is
explicitly proclaimed in Art. 116, para. 1 of the Constitution and which would be difficult
could be done with the public engagement of the civil servant
with a political party or coalition, and on the other, to limit
the conditions for using the opportunities provided by the state
service, for the purposes of the election campaign. For members of
The Council of Ministers does not have a constitutional requirement to be
politically neutral, including during the operation of
their powers. Their activity of the state ones occupied by them
positions and the political biography with which they enter the election
campaign is associated with a particular political position, which is
public and known to the whole society. In this situation, no
no logic precisely in the period of the election campaign to
requires members of the government to suspend the implementation of
its functions to ensure political neutrality in the occupied by
them civil service. Accordingly, to limit the conditions for
use of the opportunities provided by the civil service for
objectives of the election campaign, there are legal guarantees in
the texts of the Law on Radio and Television and the Law on Public Procurement, which are applied
and perform and whose observance is monitored by other bodies. Activity of
the members of the Council of Ministers in this capacity is a public activity

and it cannot remain hidden from society. This publicity and
the legal rules for conducting and financing the election campaign
campaign actually hinder the use of the state
service for the purposes of the election campaign, not going on leave to
members of the Council of Ministers, which in itself does not limit
the opportunities they have in this capacity.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 52,
al. 6 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament is unfounded and

should be rejected. 7
Special opinion of Judge Dimitar Gochev I have signed the decision of the Constitutional Court on the said case with a special opinion on the unconstitutionality of Article 101, paragraph 1 of the Medical Establishments Act. assistance in sole proprietorships can no doubt be done by an act of the Minister when the hospital was state-owned. However, when the hospital is municipal property, the Minister's order would be a disposition of municipal property - something that would be a violation and encroachment. of the right to municipal property and this undoubtedly for me constitutes a violation of Article 17 para. 1 of the Constitution.
Special opinion of judges Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Vasil Gotsev and Lyudmil NeykovI. We signed Decision № 11 of 21 May 2001 under c.d. № 18 of 2000 with a special opinion because we believe that the provision of Article 101, paragraph 5 of the Medical Establishments Act (PHA) is not unconstitutional. Our considerations are the following: The provision provides for the transformation of the public health establishments listed in the appendix to medical establishments - joint stock companies, ownership of their capital to be acquired by 51 percent of the state and 49 of the municipalities in the district whose population the medical establishment serves. The shareholding of the municipalities is proportional to the population living in the respective municipalities. The annex to art. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health includes 26 regional hospitals. These public health facilities have always served the population of all municipalities within the former district, now a district, and not only the population of the municipality - district center. They are not objects of infrastructure of local importance and are not intended to serve only the population of the municipality. Therefore, they are regional, ie. they serve the population from a larger territory - a region, not a municipality. Regional hospitals do not meet the requirements of Article 2, paragraph 1, items 6 and 9 of the LPA and § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the LGMSA to be part of the municipal infrastructure of local importance and to be designed to serve the population of the respective municipality. Therefore, they are not municipal property. This is confirmed by the wording of the last sentence of item 2 of the discussed paragraph and by the transcripts of the 276th sitting of the National Assembly of June 24, 1999 during the discussion and adoption of the PPA. In the normative acts the word “local” determines the relevance to the borders, the territory of the respective municipality. Such is its content in the constitutional provisions (for example in art. 138) in the Local Elections Act, in art. 5, art. 17, para 2 and 3, art. 22 LLSGA. That is why it has an established legal significance. In view of this and taking into account the requirement of Article 8 of the Law on Normative Acts, it should be assumed that its content is the same in § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of LLSGA. Therefore, in the sense of this text of local importance are those objects of municipal infrastructure that are intended for the needs and services of a municipality. The provisions of the State Property Act are incorrectly used to specify what is state property and vice versa, by argument otherwise, the objects of municipal property are determined. This is directly done by the Municipal Property Act (MPA), in which Article 2, paragraph 1, items 6 and 9 explicitly states that in order to be municipal property health facilities must serve the population of the municipality. The idea that municipal property is only what serves the needs of a municipality, its population, has found expression in the wording of Article 140 of the Constitution, according to which municipal property is used in the interests of the territorial community. The municipality in which the seat of the district hospital is located cannot use this health institution only in the interest of its territorial community and thus challenge the same for the population of the other municipalities in the district. The opinion that the district hospitals are municipal property, although they serve the population of several municipalities, contradicts Article 2, paragraph 1, items 6 and 9 of the AIA, and hence Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution, which is why we consider such an opinion inconsistent with the basic law. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health is not expropriated municipal property, because such does not exist on the regional hospitals, indicated in the appendix to this text. On the contrary, the municipalities acquire ownership of part of the capital of the commercial companies into which the regional hospitals are transformed. Given the purpose of these hospitals, the fact that they are not municipal property cannot be assumed that Art. .5 LPH violates the principles of local self-government or that the nationalization of municipal property has been carried out, that it has been turned into state property, which violates the provisions of Article 17, paragraph 5 and Article 140 of the Constitution. in all its paragraphs it is in compliance with the property of the existing public health establishments and the disputed para 5 of this provision refers only to state, but not to foreign (municipal) property. Judges Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova and Vasil Gotsev signed the decision with a special opinion with regard to Article 109, paragraph 1, item 3 of the Law on Public Health. The provision is from the section governing the privatization of medical institutions. The request does not object to privatization and the rights of municipal councils in this process. The restrictive requirement for the decision for privatization of medical establishments with municipal participation, providing hospital care, to be taken by the municipal councils after approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health is disputed. The petitioners consider that the participation of the Minister of Health limits the municipal councils in exercising their competencies. The health of the citizens is a constitutionally proclaimed value and its protection is assigned to the state, to which the Constitution with art. 52, para 5 also provides control functions. on all health facilities. The structure of the health network and its functioning are included in the constitutionally assigned obligations of the state. The implementation of preliminary control by the central executive power over the privatization of health care facilities with municipal participation is a concrete manifestation of the state's control functions over these facilities. The provision of Art. 109, para 1 of the LPA in its disputed part is in accordance with Art. 52, para 5 of the Constitution, therefore it is not unconstitutional. contrary to the principles of Article 4, items 2 and 4 of the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECMS). According to Article 4, item 2 of the ECMS, local governments have within the law full freedom to take the initiative on each an issue which is not excluded from their competence or delegated to another authority. The second sentence of item 4 of Article 4 of the ECMS states that the powers of local governments may be challenged or limited by another authority, central or regional, only within the law. From these provisions of the ECMS it follows that the powers of the local self-government bodies are within the limits set by law. When this law - in the case of the PPA, is not unconstitutional, as explained above, there is no inconsistency of Article 109, paragraph 1, item 3 of the PPL in its disputed part with the EHMS. On the contrary, there is full compliance of the PPL with the ECMS.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Rumen Yankov As a rule, historically, public state property has been presented as the antithesis of private and municipal property. And the term is often used vaguely to cover a number of actions related to the restriction of other types - the nationalization of the private (in the recent past) and the restriction or withdrawal of the municipal (as is the case discussed below). health (EPH) are an illustration of this line of thought. Thus, the transitional provisions of the EPA provide for public health facilities to be only those established by the Council of Ministers, regardless of the existence of norms governing the right to municipal property. The Constitution in Article 140 stipulates that the municipality has its own property, which uses in the interest of the territorial community. And Art. 17, para 4 stipulates that “The regime of the objects of state property is determined by law”. Several conclusions are imposed from the texts: the restoration of the Constitution of 1971 is proclaimed (SG, issue 29/90). ) and the right to municipal property denied by the 1947 Constitution. The distinction between state and municipal property is established. An independent settlement of their regime is envisaged, as in fact a regime means the acquisition, content and protection. Within the term under § 2, para 3 of the transitional provisions of the Constitution, the Law on Local Self-Government and Local Administration (LLSGA), SG , issue 29/91. Pursuant to § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the same law from the objects of the municipal infrastructure of local significance, intended for administrative needs of the municipality, as well as for health, cultural, commercial and household services, become its property (amendments to SG, issue 49/95 and issue 26/2000 do not apply to hospitals). The rule that hospitals of local importance are the property of municipalities is repeated by Art. .2 of the Municipal Property Act. From the above follows the conclusion that the hospitals are inherently declared public municipal property. An argument that the hospitals are not public state property is Article 2 of the State Property Act. Its provision can be summarized - these are the properties intended for "permanent satisfaction of public needs of national importance through common use." The right of the legislator under Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution is to determine the regime of state and municipal property. The right of ownership should be understood as the content of the powers, expressed in the unchanged trinity of time - use, possession and disposal. The power of disposal, in turn, is expressed in the possibility for the owner to alienate, encumber or establish encumbrances in respect of his own right. But just as the classical right to property expands over time in terms of property (intellectual, commercial property, intangibles, etc.), so do the forms of influence through the right of disposal also mark development. Thus, the right to dispose must now unconditionally include the power by which a decision can be taken to transform and privatize certain property. And an order in this case is present because they cease to be municipal property within the meaning of the law the property and belongings of the companies, even if the municipality was their sole owner - Article 2, paragraph 4 of the LPA and Article 104, paragraph 1 of the LPA. . As a result, the decision to determine the size of the units and shares and to alienate them as a variant of the right of disposal cannot be taken by the municipality. Therefore, outside the prerogatives of the Council of Ministers, which by virtue of Article 106 of the Constitution is authorized to manage only state property, is to delegate to a minister or the Privatization Agency the right to decide on the privatization of municipal property. Legal norms in this sense contradict the Constitution, namely that the state is united with local self-government, and that the municipality has the right to property, which is used in the interest of the territorial community - Article 2, paragraph 1 and Article 140 of the Constitution. As a type of property, the municipal public property according to art. 17, para 1 of the Constitution, on an equal footing with the others, is guaranteed and protected by law. Her right to protection is guaranteed by way of exclusion - no kind of property right can be infringed outside the hypothesis of art. 17, para 5. It is these guarantees and protection that are denied and violated by the Medical Establishments Act. In a market economy oriented society, the right to property is an institution of civil law and its content can be limited only by the owner, except when the prerequisites for expropriation within the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. Indeed, by virtue of Article 52, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law, the state is authorized to exercise control over all health care institutions. However, such strict control is envisaged to be carried out to the maximum extent under Part Three of the Health Insurance Act: a commission appointed by the Minister of Health prepares the regional health card, which is then approved by the Minister - Article 32 of the law; The envisaged strict registration and permitting regime for the opening of hospitals of any kind in the same law is also carried out directly by the Minister of Health. And another important thing: The Law on Municipal Property is one of those under Chapter One of the Constitution - Basic Principles voted by the National Assembly on the grounds of § 3, para 3 of the transitional and final provisions. Indeed, a constitutional delegation is also provided for in Article 52, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution, but as far as health insurance and financing of health care are concerned. It is inadmissible for the initial regime of the right to municipal property to be derogated from by norms of another law, which does not have as its subject the basic constitutional principles. From the point of view of this general statement the following texts of PPA contradict the Constitution: 65/2000, according to which the existing public health establishments for hospital care are transformed into medical establishments - sole proprietorships, by order of the Minister of Health by September 1, 2000. The generic term “public health establishments for hospital care” is used. it cannot be understood otherwise than as including state and public municipal property. If the text is applied, it must be assumed that the powers include the right to dispose in the above sense of a body of executive power, instead of a body of local self-government. The provision of Article 102, paragraph 1 provides that public health facilities for outpatient care are also transformed by order of the Minister into sole proprietorships, the text referring to outpatient clinics for primary and group medical care, medical and dental centers, medical-dental and diagnostic-consulting centers, as well as independent laboratories of this type. Insofar as the mentioned establishments are public municipal property, as they are unconditionally part of the local health infrastructure and the fact that even in this case their right to a share is not recognized, the provision is obviously unconstitutional. The disputed provision of Art. 104, para. 1 LPH is related to the ones discussed above. It cannot have an independent existence, as its hypothesis does not include norms commented above, which are unconstitutional. And since the premise contradicts the Constitution, the consequences cannot be qualified in any other way. Ultimately, the disputed norms have nothing to do with the powers of the state under Article 52, paragraph 5 of the Constitution to exercise control over all health facilities in the country. They can be seen as a targeted privatization of the hospital business.
THE CO., DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,
a

C As a party to c.d. Me18 / 2000, formed at the request of 57
bettors from ХХХУ !! National Assembly to establish an anti-
constitutionality of the provisions of Art. 101 para. 1 and 5, Art. 102 para. 1, art. 104
al. Tichl. 109 para. 1 item 3 of the Medical Establishments Act, we believe that
the same is unfounded and should be rejected. The considerations
we have the following:

In accordance with the attacked art. 101 para. 1 of the PPA, the Minister of
the healthcare system transforms the existing public ones by an order
health care facilities, dispensaries and hospital
agnostic and medical structures at the higher medical schools in
educational establishments - sole proprietorships. To clarify the
In accordance with this provision, it is necessary to give a definition of
personal health facilities. Provisions from which such can be derived
treats exist in the Public Health Act:

- Health facilities in the sense of EPA are HEI and the National
public health centers; outpatient polyclinic
establishments, hospitals, sanatoriums and hospitals.
health and rehabilitation establishments established under the EPA until the
their development, closure or liquidation under the PPA. / 9 1 para.
1 ial. 2 of the Additional Provisions of EPA /

- Medical care in the country is provided by health
conducted under the EPA and by medical institutions under the EPA. / art. 1a para. 2 CEE /

- The health establishments are public / art. And al. 3 CEE /

- Public health establishments have a mixed form of financial
cheese:

"Art. 46 EPA: The budget of the public health institution is 06-
from subsidies from the republican and municipal budgets, revenues from
health insurance and cash payments, from own source revenues, donations
and other sources. "

- Health facilities established in the order of the already obsolete
EPAs are not divided into state or municipal depending on
to the property, and are defined as public.These public
health facilities must be brought into line with the new one
regulation provided by the PPA through transformation, closure or liquidation
early.

From the establishment of the EPA until its amendment in 1991,
only public health facilities in which citizens

their right to free medical care. With the amendment of
Art. 25 of EPA / SG no. 15/1991 / and the adoption of the new art. 25 a, is given
possibility to establish a private health institution, after permission
we from the Minister of Health. State health facilities
are established at the Ministry of Health, medical universities, people's councils,
Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Interior, General Directorate of Construction
troops. The health bodies and the establishment of the people's councils are
led by the Minister of Health. With the change of EPA with SG
no. 12 of 1997, healthcare facilities are now divided into public and
private and are defined as legal entities. A form of
financing of public health facilities with subsidies from the Republic
lycan and municipal budgets, as well as from other sources. / For
comparison: art. For - SG no. 70/1989, Art. 46 - SG no. 12/1997, amended DV
no. 70/1998 / Such form of financing is not inadmissible and not
contradicts the Municipal Property Act or the State Property Act
public property. The financing of public health institutions
on the one hand, and their significance in the system on the other
of health care, logically corresponds to the distribution of
ownership of capital and their management in the transformation
it them in commercial companies. In accordance with Art. 101 para. 1 of the PPL, pub-
personal healthcare facilities are transformed into le-
educational establishments - sole proprietorships with an order of
Minister of Health. In all existing public
health establishments, with the exception of those specified in Art. 101 para. 4 ial. Bot
LPH, with their transformation into medical institutions, the ownership of
their capital is acquired by the municipality on whose territories it is located
the registered office of the company and the rights are exercised by the
the municipal council. Public health establishments covered by
the provision of para. 5 are indicated in a list attached to the PPA and
brew at 26 regional centers in the country. The legislator, by law op-
shares that 51 percent of their ownership of the capital remains for
the state and are accordingly managed by the Minister of Health
net and 49 per cent of the capital remain for the municipalities in the district, whose
settlement the medical establishment serves. In view of the above,
there that in this case the right of the municipal councils not to be violated
dispose of their property as far as health is concerned
establishments that are not owned by the municipalities. Considering
the location and importance of these hospitals to serve the population.
from different municipalities, it cannot be assumed that there has been an
compliance with the principles of local self-government or that
of nationalization of municipal property in contradiction with the
the provisions of Art. 17 para. 5 of the Constitution ..

The arguments in connection with the provisions of Art. 102
al. 1 of the Health Insurance Act, concerning the existing public health establishments for
outpatient care.

In support of the above is the provision of p. 1 para. 2 of
EPA, the last sentence, which refers to the order of the EPA on
liquidation, transformation and closure of
health facilities in accordance with the Public Health Act. Raz-
the ordinance is from 1999 / SG no. 113 of 1999 / Given the
the order of p. 2 of the same law, / SG no. 12 of 1997 /, which states

that public health facilities within the meaning of the EPA are those that are
established by the Council of Ministers for the needs of public health
compliance, the logic of the legislation becomes clear. Obviously the new one
regulation is given by the PPA, and the changes in the EPA are for the purpose of synchronization of
the two laws, amending and bringing the obsolete regulation in line with
with the new relationship. Obviously, the goal is not nationalization, but
on the contrary, the aim is to strengthen the role of municipalities and decentralize
management. It is logical to do this with acts of executive
authority, in accordance with the legislation in force in the country. IN
in this sense, there is no contradiction between the attacked members and Art. 4
al. 1 art. 140 of the Constitution.

Health policy is of utmost importance for the country
as far as it directly affects the population, life and health of the nation. Responsible
responsibility for the general policy of the government
the President, and part of that policy is undoubtedly health policy.
for which the Minister of Health is directly responsible.
Not coincidentally, based on the understanding of the extreme importance
of the healthcare activity, the legislator provides the
Minister of Health and control functions, which are close
related to the responsibility arising from the leadership role it has
the same for the implementation of health policy. In this regard,
the above also applies to the provision of Art. 109 para. 1 item 3, in the attacked
part ‘after approval or on the proposal of the Minister of Health
preservation '. Here again there is a manifestation of the control function of mi-
the Minister of Health, logically related to the overall activity
health control, as an activity of exceptional
public interest and in which any reform must be
is done taking into account the immediate impact on
the population of the country. In this sense, we consider that there is no
in line with the European Charter of Local Self-Government.

In short, the health establishments established under the EPA are
public, with mixed funding. The medical establishments, according to the Health Insurance Act, are
already public, private or municipal, as in the case of hospitals in
the list under Art. 101 para. 5 of the PPA, the property is divided between
and the state. The transformation of the public health institution in
medical institution - a sole proprietorship, is made by the
of healthcare. With the transformation of public health
conducted outside the exceptions of para. 4 et al. 5 of Art. 101 LPH, property-
their capital is acquired by the municipality on whose territory they are located
locates the registered office of the company and the rights are exercised
by the respective municipal council. This is, in fact, the way to clearly define
municipal property.

With regard to the provision of Art. 104 of the PPL, we believe that it is not
person in conflict with the Constitution. The Constitution determines the
as public and private, as the regime of the objects of the state
and municipal property is determined by law, ie. is a matter of law
additional assessment. In this sense is also Decision Me 19 of the Constitutional
the court of 21.12.19993. The existence of a possible discrepancy between
legal provisions of individual laws must be removed
by legislative means.

In view of the above, we consider that the request for
declaring unconstitutional of Art. 101 para. You 5, art. 102 para. 1, art.
104 para. 1 art. 109 para. 1 item 3, in the part “after approval or upon proposed
the Minister of Health ”, from the Law on Medical Certificates
as well as for annulment of the acts of the Minister of
health care for the transformation of municipal health facilities,
are unfounded and should be rejected.
OPINION

in constitutional case Me 18 of 2000

The Council of Ministers, taking advantage of the provided to him
possibility with the ruling of the Constitutional Court of 19 January 2001,
Expresses the following opinion in constitutional case Ke 18 of 2000:

The constitutional case was initiated at the request of a group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality> of
the provisions of art. 101, para. You 5, art. 102, para. 1, art. 104, para. 1 and Art. 109, para. 1,
item 3 of the Medical Establishments Act, to establish the non-compliance of
Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the same law with an international agreement, under which the Republic
Bulgaria is a party, as well as to announce the acts of the Minister of
health care, which transforms municipal health facilities, for
insignificant. The request is for declaring unconstitutional
the provisions of art. 101, para. 1 and 5, Art. 102, para. 1, art. 104, para. 1 art. 109, para. 1,
item 3 of the Medical Establishments Act as contradictory to Art. 4, para. You
Art. 140 of the Constitution, but the petitioners argue that their
constitutionality as a contradiction with other constitutional principles and norms
the principle of local self - government, the principle of protection of
property and art. 17, para. 5. According to the applicants, the provision
of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 does not correspond to the principles of art. 4, items 2 and 4 of
The European Charter of Local Self - Government.

The Constitutional Court, by its ruling of 26 January 2001, is
admitted for consideration on the merits the request in the part for establishing the

unconstitutionality and non-compliance with an international treaty, but no

and the claim for annulment of acts of
Minister. In view of this, the Council of Ministers expressed an opinion on
essentially "only" regarding the "alleged" unconstitutionality and
non-compliance with an international treaty of the provisions of the Law on
medical institution, but not on the disputed reality of
the acts of the Minister of Health.

The examination of disputes concerning the legality of
the acts of the ministers is not within the competence of the Constitutional Court. From
one party, Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution explicitly provides that under these
Disputes are ruled by the Supreme Administrative Court. On the other hand,
Art. 149 of the Constitution nor does it provide for such a power for
The Constitutional Court does not allow it to be granted to him by law. Here
why art. 22, para. 3 of the Constitutional Court Act is not a ground on which
the requesting MPs may refer to the Constitutional Court
court with a question about the legality of acts of the Minister of
healthcare, with which he transforms healthcare facilities into commercial ones
companies.

The Council of Ministers considers that all requests for announcement of
unconstitutionality of provisions of the Medical Establishments Act
should be rejected as unfounded in view of the following
considerations:

1. In the first place, the request states that the provisions of Art. 101,
al. | and Art. 102, para. 1 authority of the Minister of Health to
transforms the existing public facilities for hospital and
outpatient care violates the guaranteed in Art. 140 of the Constitution

right of municipalities to property. The provisions provide for the disposal of

foreign property, which violates the constitutional principle of protection
of property.

The subject of this request are provisions for which the law
the envisaged possibility of application - until September 1, 2000, respectively until
March 1, 2000, ended at the time of their dispute before
The Constitutional Court. Even assuming that the deadlines in which
the Minister of Health was to exercise the power to
transforms existing public health facilities into commercial ones
companies are instructive, it should be borne in mind that the process of
conversion has already been completed, and with the exhaustion of opportunities for
application of the two legal norms has ended and their effect. that's why
we consider that the request to declare unconstitutional
the provisions of art. 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 1 should not be considered under
substance, and the constitutional case in this part should be terminated
due to the dropped subject of the attacked law.

In addition, the subject of the request are provisions whose
content is broader than the content that importers in
the circumstantial part of his request. Article 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 2
authorize the Minister of Health with the transformation of
all existing public health facilities for hospital and
outpatient care. A discrepancy should be found between
the will of the petitioners to be declared in the petitum
entirely for unconstitutional provisions of Art. 101, para 1 and Art. 102,
providing for the authority of the Minister of Health to
transforms all public health facilities, including those that
manage and administer state property, and set out in

the circumstantial part of the request their view of

unconstitutionality only in cases where this power is
provided as far as possible the transformation of public health facilities, which
manage and manage property - municipal property. Not only
the petitioners do not indicate, but there is none
constitutional and legal obstacle for the legislator to authorize the Minister of
healthcare to transform public health> facilities,
managing and managing state property, given that
the statement that the provisions of Art. 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 2 are entirely
unconstitutional, is unfounded.

The allegations themselves, with which in the circumstantial
part of the request argues the contradiction of Art. 107, para. You art. 102,
para 2 of the Law for the medical establishments with art. 140 of the Constitution. It is said,
that the legal provisions authorize the Minister of Health to
transforms municipal health facilities. It should be borne in mind that
our legislation not only at the time of the adoption of the Law on
medical institutions, but even before that did not know the status of municipal
hospital, respectively of the municipal polyclinic, even less differentiates
state health facilities and municipal health facilities based on
the different form of ownership - state or municipal, which is theirs
provided for management and administration. Until the amendments in 1997.
Art. 2 of the Public Health Act distinguishes public health
establishments at the Ministry of Health and state health
establishments to the people's councils, not state health establishments and
municipal health facilities. Effective at the time of entry into force
of the Medical Establishments Act, wording of Art. 2 also does not distinguish
public medical establishments, including those for which the new law in

Art. 101, para. You art. 102, para. 1 envisages transformation into medical establishments -

commercial companies, state and municipal, on the contrary - provides
all of them to be created, transformed and closed by the Council of Ministers.
Moreover, the need for coordination with the municipality in the establishment,
the transformation and closure of certain public health facilities is
provided not in view of the fact that she is the owner of the property to be
manages and manages the health facility, and given the
the health care provided by it mainly to the population of
the respective municipality, ie given the decentralized tasks in the municipality
on the implementation of the state function for health protection of

citizens.

The protection of the health of citizens is a function of the state,
assigned to her by Art. 52, para. 3 of the Constitution. The responsibility for hers
implementation is entirely the state, regardless of whether it is legislative
assigned to the municipalities separate tasks for its implementation. An important aspect of
this responsibility of the state is its responsibility for the overall provision
of the necessary network of health facilities for its citizens. As
the legislative decision before - the Council of Ministers to establish,
transforms and closes> public> health facilities, and
the legislative decision in art. 101, para. You art. 102, para. 1 are based on
the constitutional requirement of art. 52, para. 3 the state to provide protection to
the health of its citizens by providing appropriate to theirs
health needs network of medical institutions. The constitution outlines
the protection of the health of citizens as a public interest of the highest
order, which allows state regulation of public relations in
this area, including legislative restrictions on what is derived from
other constitutional principles and norms the right of municipalities to freely

manage and dispose of their property and freely to

develop a business initiative based on it. What's more, it's happening
issue of management and disposal of property on sites with
health purpose, which is largely transferred from
the state of the municipalities by virtue of 8 7, para. 1, item 6 of the Local Law
self-government and local administration in relation to decentralized
in them tasks for the implementation of the state function for protection of
the health of citizens. In principle, the performance of a public function is
grounds for establishing a public-law regime of the property with which
its implementation is ensured by the state and the municipalities.

The Law on Medical Establishments provides for a commercial company
limited liability company and joint stock company such as
the only legal forms in which the state and municipalities, implementing this
the constitutionally assigned function of protecting the health of citizens,
may organize medical activity (art. 36, para. 1, sentence two and art. 37,
al. 3). The new legislation requires bringing in the existing ones
public health facilities in accordance with it, ie their transformation
in limited liability companies or in joint stock companies
companies, or their closure (Art. 107). Article 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 1 by
essence do not create an opportunity for manifestations of free economic
initiative related to the disposal of property, and assign specific
legal action to bring it into line with the legal requirements of
the medical activity organized by the state and the municipalities. These actions
in particular to the Minister of Health with a view to
its capacity as a specialized body of executive power, which
conducts the state policy in the field of healthcare, as the goal is

through them to provide the necessary network of medical services for the country

establishments organized in the performance of the state function for protection of
the health of citizens.

Article 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 1 not only find constitutional
support in Art. 52, para. 3, because the public interest protected by this norm by
the highest order and the public function assigned to it allow
legislative restriction of the constitutionally guaranteed right to
property of the municipalities. We consider the allegations themselves to be unfounded,
with which a direct contradiction of art. 101, para. 1 art. 102, para. 2 of
The Law on Medical Establishments with Art. 140 of the Constitution, as well as with
the constitutional principle of protection of property. Importers of
request maintain that in view of these constitutional provisions
only in the prerogatives of the municipal council should be
disposal of property - municipal property. As far as
The Constitution does not regulate the powers of the municipal council, including
those related to the exercise of the right of ownership of the municipality,
the petitioners argue the unconstitutionality of both
provisions as contrary to the applicable laws of the country, according to
which right of the municipal councils is to dispose of the property -
municipal property, including when they form or
transform into commercial companies (Art. 62, para. 2 of the Commercial Law).
At the same time, however, the legislation in this direction is not based
so much of Art. 17, para. 1 иЗичл. 140, and of another constitutional provision -
of Art. 17, para. 4 of the Constitution, according to which the regime of the objects of
municipal property is determined by law. The constitutional
legislator provides for the sites - state and municipal property,
separate regulation precisely because it considers that insofar as their purpose is

to ensure the performance of public functions, their regime in contrast

of the general regime of ownership may also include public law
elements. In this sense, Art. 101, para. 1 art. 102, para. 1 are provisions that
fit into the constitutional norm of Art. 17, para. 4.

2 Secondly, the request alleges that Art. 101, para. 5,
providing for shareholding of the state in commercial companies -
medical facilities for hospital care, essentially expropriating municipal
property in contradiction with art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. To be
supported by this claim, it should be established that the managed and
managed by public health establishments in accordance with the Annex to
Art. 101, para. 5 property is municipal property. Listed in the appendix
health facilities are all health facilities that have always served the population
of several municipalities - of all municipalities within the former district, and after
this - the area. For the properties managed and managed by them to
the moment of entry into force of the Local Self-Government Act and
the local administration was not present in respect of any municipality
the acquisition basis of 8 7, para. 1, item 6 of the same law, according to which in c
municipal property passes the state property - objects of the municipal
infrastructure of local importance, intended for health care.
In view of this, by virtue of the disputed as unconstitutional
provision does not expropriate municipal property as it actually is
the municipality does not have, on the contrary - the municipalities acquire property - joint stock
participation in the capital of commercial companies. As for herself
provision of art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution, which argues
contradiction, it does not refer to the forced expropriation of property
public legal entities, such as the state and municipalities. On the contrary, this one
provision is a constitutional ground for acquiring property from

the state and the municipalities. In this sense, the statement is not only untrue, but also

unfounded, because it maintains a contradiction with disproportionate to
municipalities constitutional norm.

3. Thirdly, according to the applicants, the provision of
Art. 104, para. 1, providing for the transfer of property - public state and
public municipal property, in the capital of commercial companies, and
the provision of art. 109, para. 1, item 3 in the part, envisaging the approval or
the proposal of the Minister of Health in decision-making
for privatization of medical institutions with municipal participation are also
unconstitutional. However, the petitioners do not substantiate their claims,
indicating the specific constitutional norm, the legal requirements of which
regulations violate. The request contains a statement of contradiction
of Art. 104, para. 1 with reasons to a decision of the Constitutional Court. It should be
noted that the cited opinion of the Constitutional Court referred to the objects
- exclusive state property according to art. 18 of the Constitution, among
which are not the objects with health purpose, ie in it can not be
find arguments to substantiate the specific claim for
unconstitutionality. The request also claims that Art. 104, para. 1
contradicts Art. 7, para. 2 of the Municipal Property Act and of Art. 7,
al. 1 of the State Property Act, and Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 - of the Law on
transformation and privatization of state and municipal enterprises such as
whole. It is further maintained that in so far as those provisions constitute
legal norms adopted in contradiction with the current legislation, they
violate the principle of the rule of law> state, which is why they are
unconstitutional. However, the contradiction between legal provisions
in itself, without their objective contradiction with
constitutional principle or norm cannot “justify

unconstitutionality .. We consider that any request to declare

unconstitutionality based only on argumentation, according to which
the second provision at the time of adoption is unconstitutional because
was adopted in contradiction with the constitutional principle of the rule of law, f
unreasonable.

The Council of Ministers considers that the request to establish
inconsistency with the provision of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 with international
a contract to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party should be rejected
as unfounded. The petitioners maintain that the provision of
Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 does not correspond to the principles of art. 4, items 2 and 4 of
The European Charter of Local Self-Government, as it is
restrict municipal councils in exercising their competencies. This
statement is also unfounded, because it is in the second sentence of
the cited provision of Art. 4, item 4 of the international agreement is allowed
the possibility of limiting the powers of local authorities
self-government by another authority when it is within the law.

In view of the above considerations, the Council of Ministers
expresses an opinion according to which the provisions of Art. 101, para. You 5,
Art. 102, para. 1, art. 104, para. 1 and Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the Medical Act
establishments are constitutionally compliant, and Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the same law -
corresponding to the principles of art. 4 of the European Charter for Local Governments
self-government, in view of which we find the request to declare
unconstitutionality and establishing non-compliance with international

a contract to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party is unfounded.
Opinion
by Dr. Ilko Semerdzhiev - Minister of Health
in the constitutional case Ho 18/2000

Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

A request was made by 57 MPs to establish
the unconstitutionality of the provisions of Art. 101, para. | and 5, Art. 102, para. | ichl.
104, para. | of the Medical Establishments Act (promulgated, SG No. 62/1999, supplemented, SG No. 88
from 1999, amended, no. 113 of 1999, amended, no. 114 of 1999, as amended. and add., no. 36 of
2000, no. 65 of 2000, no. 108 of 2000), as well as a request for the establishment of
inconsistency of art. 109, para. 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or under
proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the same law with the European one
charter for local self-government (promulgated SG, issue 46 of 20
00).

With a ruling of 18.01.2001 of the Constitutional Court the request was admitted for
examination on the merits, and the Minister of Health is constituted as
interested party.

The request contains the following allegations:

1. The provisions of art. 101, para. | and 5 of the Medical Establishments Act (PHA)
contradict Art. 140 of the Constitution and of Art. 21, para. 1, item Type of the Law on
the local self-government and the local administration and art. 8 in connection with art. 2, para. 1,
item bid from the Municipal Property Act (MPA).

P. The provision of art. 101, para. 5 of the PPA is in contradiction with Art. 17, para. 5 from
The Constitution.

Sh. The provision of art. 102, para. | of the PPA contradicts by analogy with Art. 140 and Art.
17, para. 5 of the Constitution.

TU. The provision of Art. 104, para. | of the PPA contradicts the provisions of Art. 7, para.
2 of ZOS, of art. 7, para. | of the State Property Act (STA) and of Decision Ho
5/2000 on k. e. He 4 of 2000 of the Constitutional Court.

U. The provision of art. 109, para. 1 of the PPA is in contradiction with the principles of Art. 4, vol.
2 and 4 of the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECHR).

M1. The acts of the Minister of Health for transformation for the municipal ones
health establishments are null and void, in view of which and on the grounds of Art. 22, para. 3 of
The Constitutional Court Act to be declared null and void.

I express the following opinion on the allegations made in the request:

1. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 101, para. You
5 of 3 LZ:

1 The petitum of the request states that it is claimed that
unconstitutionality of the entire provision of Art. 101, para. 1 of the PPL. IN
the circumstantial part of the request is written: “According to the provisions of Art. 101,
al. | of the Public Health Insurance Act, all public health care facilities for hospital care are transformed
in sole proprietorships by order of the Minister of Health.
Referred to municipal hospitals, the provision means that the Minister
has illegally disposed of foreign (municipal) and not state property. ”

According to Art. 101, para. | of the Medical Establishments Act the existing ones
public health care facilities, dispensaries and hospitals
diagnostic and treatment structures at> higher medical schools
transform into medical establishments - sole proprietorships, by order of
the Minister of Health by September 2000

I believe that the request of the MPs refers only to
the transformation of public health institutions for hospital care into medical ones
establishments whose owner of the capital is the respective municipal council.

In view of this, I ask for the request to establish the unconstitutionality of
Art. 101, para. | of the PPA to be allowed only in respect of these medical
establishments (“municipal hospitals”).

2. The statement that with the provisions of art. 101, a. | and 5 of the PPA, the Minister of
Healthcare has disposed of foreign (municipal) property, not state property
property is incorrect. This is because the order to convert one
health institution in a medical institution - a sole proprietorship is not an act of
disposal of property and does not contradict Art. 140 of the Constitution.

The provisions of Art. 101, para. 1 and 5 of the PPA are directly related to the new legal regime
of medical institutions and with the change of the status of the existing health ones
establishments that are found by the new PPA.

Until the entry into force of the Medical Establishments Act - 12.07.1999, the Law on
public health (EPH) regulates the status of health facilities. According to Art.
Ta, al. 2 of the EPA (as amended on 02.04.1999) the medical care of the population
is organized by health facilities - public and private, and medical
specialists in private medical practice. Paragraph 2 of the Additional
provisions of the EPA contain a legal definition of the term "public health
establishments "- these are those establishments, which are established by the Council of Ministers for
the needs of public health. Pursuant to Art. 2, para. 2 of the EPA publicly
health institution is opened, transformed and closed by the Council of Ministers under
proposal of the Minister of Health. The proposal is agreed with
the municipal council, when the public health institution serves mainly
the population of the municipality on whose territory it is located. The law of the people
Health does not divide public health facilities into state and municipal and no
provides powers to the municipal council to create, transform or close

public health facilities. This is because the activities of public health
establishments is of public importance and it does not matter whose property is provided
their management and administration. For the legislator, her activities were leading
its financing. The creation, transformation and closure of public ones
Health facilities have never been the authority of local authorities
self-government.

The provisions of Art. 101 - 107 of the PPA are directly related to bringing
existing public health facilities for outpatient and inpatient care in
compliance with the requirements of the new law, ie with the change of their status - from
public health facilities - legal entities on budget support, they become
medical establishments - commercial companies.

3. The legislator has assigned not to the Council of Ministers, but to a person specifically designated by
him another body of executive power - the Minister of Health with a special
order to transform the existing public health facilities into hospital and
outpatient care under the terms and conditions established by law (Articles 101-104 of 3LZ).

The change in the status of public health facilities that are established by
The Council of Ministers for the needs of public health is not a power
of the municipal council. With the provisions of art. 101 - 104 of the PPA, the legislator has given
powers of the Minister of Health, as the central body of the
the executive branch, which conducts and is responsible for the state policy in
healthcare, to transform existing public health
establishments in medical establishments by | March 2000 for outpatient care, and until 1
September 2000 for hospital care. Thus the legislator has created
guarantee for a unified and uniform approach in the transformation into medical establishments of
the public health establishments established over the years by the Council of Ministers.
The Minister of Health is obliged to comply with legal provisions
to “carry out a one-off and timely transformation of the status of
existing public health facilities throughout the country.
The territorial location in the country of the medical establishments in accordance with
public needs for medical care is a guarantee for the realization of
the constitutional right of citizens to affordable medical care.

The competence delegated by the National Assembly to the Minister of
healthcare is severely limited. The legislator has precisely defined the establishments
which are subject to transformation - the existing public health facilities,
as well as the type of medical institution in which they should be transformed. It is in
the competence of the Minister of Health is to establish the compliance of
the existing public health institution with the introduced new specific ones
characteristics and requirements to the medical establishments - art. 16 - 23; Art. 57 - 81 of
З3ЛЗ. The legislator also determines the legal organizational form of the new medical services
establishments - sole proprietorships with limited liability or sole proprietorships
joint stock companies (Art. 101, para. Gichl. 102, para. | of 3LZ).

In the hypotheses of Art. 101-104 of the Health Insurance Act, the Minister of Health acts in
the conditions of "bound competence", ie he does not dispose of
property. In these cases, the minister only changes the status - transforms
the existing public health establishments in medical establishments - commercial
companies with municipal property by applying the law in compliance with the established
form and requirements.

4. The provisions of art. 101, para. | and 5, Art. 102, para. | and Art. 104, para. | from LPH no
contradict the principles of the rule of law, local self - government and
protection of property and due to the following:

a) According to the Constitution, self - government is exercised within
the municipality, which is a basic administrative-territorial unit (art. 136, para 1).
In decision Ho 9 of the Constitutional Court under Code He 6 of 2000 was adopted
the opinion that by giving the municipalities the status of a legal entity (Art. 136,
al. 3) with its own bodies, property and budget (Art. 140 and Art. 141, para 1), the Constitution
regulates local self-government as a form of decentralization of state
power in order to increase the role of self-governing communities in resolving
issues of local importance. In this regard, ie "to regulate and manage in
within the law, on their responsibility and in the interest of their population,
an essential part of public affairs "(in the words of Article 3 of the European Charter of
local self-government) are also the powers of municipal councils.

6) The LPZ imperatively indicates the body that also exercises the rights of
ownership of the capital of the new medical establishments - commercial companies (Art.
101, para. 6 of the PPL). The text of Art. 101, para. 6 of the PPA corresponds to Art. 9, para. 3, vol. Goth
the law, which depending on the territorial scope of the served population
defines the medical establishments for hospital care as regional ones when they serve
the population of one or neighboring municipalities. Only with the PPA was the criterion introduced
establishments are of local importance and which of national. Depending on that
the legislator has determined who will be the owner of the capital of the medical institutions
establishments. The municipality is the sole owner of the capital of all establishments for
outpatient and inpatient care that are of local importance. In the implementation of
the law in all transformation orders issued by the Minister of
Healthcare on the grounds of art. 101, para. | ibichl. 102, para. | from LPH, it is explicit
stated that the rights of the municipality as sole owner of the capital of
the medical institution for outpatient or inpatient care are exercised by
the relevant municipal council.

Thus, defending the principle of local self-government, the legislator
has determined the municipality as the sole owner of the capital of these medical facilities
facilities, as they will provide outpatient and inpatient medical care to
the population living in its territory. By entering the converted
health facilities in the Commercial Register, the municipal council will exercise the rights
of the municipality as a sole owner of the capital of the respective medical facility
place.

c) The application of the provisions of art. 101 and 102 of the PPA is directly related to
guaranteed in Art. 52, para. | of the Constitution rights of citizens - the right to
health insurance guaranteeing them affordable medical care and the right to
free use of medical care. This constitutional provision does not
is directly applicable and states that it will apply under the same conditions,
determined by law. With the Health Insurance Act, the Medical Insurance Act
establishments, the Public Health Act and the Professional Organizations Act of
doctors and dentists are regulated basic public relations,
affecting these constitutional rights, such as the immediate exercise of
the right to medical care is provided in medical institutions.

In view of the above, I consider that the provision of Art. 140 from
The Constitution and the texts mentioned by the PPA do not constitute an order with
municipal property.

P. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 101, para. 5
от3ЛЗ:

With the provision of art. 101, para. 5 of the PPA not with nationalization in
contradiction with art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution.

According to Art. 101, para. 5 of the Health Insurance Act with the transformation of the public health establishments
according to the application in medical institutions - joint stock companies, property
on their capital is acquired by:

1. the state and is managed by the Minister of Health - for 51 per cent of
capital;

2. the municipalities of the district, whose population the medical establishment serves - for 49 of
one hundred of the capital; "The shareholding of the municipalities is proportional to
the population living in the respective municipalities.

In this case (Article 101, paragraph 5 of 3LZ) there is no coercion
expropriation, nor nationalization of municipal property, but a mixed one was created
form of government - between the state and the municipalities located on the territory
of one area.

In Art. 2 of the Municipal Property Act indicate which real estates they are
municipal property, between which by virtue of para. 1, item 6 are also the objects of
municipal infrastructure of local importance, designed for health
servicing the population of the respective municipality. Listed in the annex
to Art. 101, para. 5 of the PHA united regional (former districts) hospitals serve
the population of the respective district, and not only the population of the municipality - district
center. These medical establishments have a status under Art. 9, para. 3, item 2 of the PPA - regional
hospitals.

Due to these characteristics of the united regional hospitals, the legislator is
provided for a mixed form of government by determining the legal and organizational
form - joint stock company. Thus in the management of the hospital have
participation of both the Minister of Health and local authorities
self-government of the population from the whole district.

In view of the above, the statement that with the provision of Art. 101, para. 5 of the PPA is
nationalization of the municipal property in contradiction with art. 17, para.
5 of the Constitution is unfounded.

Sh. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of Art. 102, para. 1
from 3 LZ:

It is incorrect to claim that with the provision of Art. 102, para. | by the Minister of Public Health
of healthcare has disposed of foreign (municipal) property, not with
state property.

In this regard, I support the reasons set out in item Gi P of the opinion. Like
proof that neither an order nor a nationalization has been carried out with
municipal property we apply court decisions for registration of medical
establishments - sole proprietorships in the respective courts. In these acts
it is explicitly written that with their transformation the respective Municipal Council
exercises the rights of sole owner of the capital of medical establishments,

that is, from the moment of their court registration, the Municipal Council manages
medical establishments and may dispose of them.

It should be borne in mind that in compliance with the provisions of Art. 101, para. | ichl.
102, para. | of the Health Insurance Act, the Minister of Health within the terms specified by law
has issued conversion orders. According to data from the Regional Centers on
Healthcare, these are about 340 outpatient hospitals and 140
medical establishments for hospital care. They are registered in the respective districts
courts. "Medical institutions for> outpatient care have received
certificate from the Regional Health Centers, and most of
the medical establishments for hospital care have received a permit for implementation
of medical activity by the Minister of Health. This is how it is completed
the process of aligning existing public health
establishments with the provisions of the Medical Establishments Act.

TU. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 104, para. 1
от3ЛЗ:

This request should not be considered by the Constitutional Court, as in
the request does not specify which text of the Constitution contradicts the provision of
Art. 104, para. | from ZLZ. It is alleged that that provision is contrary to the provisions of
Art. 7, para. 2 of the AIA Art. 7, para. | of the LSA in view of which and on the grounds of Art. 149, para. 1
of the Constitution in connection with Art. 12, para. 1 of the Constitutional Court Act
the request should not be considered.

Nevertheless, I believe that the PPA is special in relation to the above
provisions - art. 7, para. 2 of the AIA Art. 7, para. | from ZDS.

Acquisition, management, administration and disposal of real estate
properties - municipal property is regulated by the Municipal Property Act,
unless otherwise provided by a special law (Article 1 of the AIA). By virtue of the PPL
(art. 104, para. 1 of 3LZ) with the transformation of the public health establishments
movable and immovable property provided for management and administration -
state or municipal property, included in the balance sheets of health care institutions,
on the basis of which they are transformed, becomes the property of the companies.

U. On the request for establishing a discrepancy of art. 109, para. 1, item 3
on the words "after approval or on the proposal of the Minister of
Health ”from the same law with the European Charter of Local
self:

The provision of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPA is not in contradiction with the principles of art.
4, items 2 and 4 of the ECMS. This is evident from the text of Art. 3, item 1, art. 4, item Gi33 from EHMS.
The European Charter of Local Self-Government also allows for the “assignment of
duties of another authority according to the scale and nature of the task and
the requirements for efficiency and economy ”, and in Art. 3, vol. | ichl. 4, item | i2 is explicit
recorded that the powers of local governments are within
of the law.

Articles 29 - 34 of the PPA regulate the planning and distribution of
territorial principle of the public interest in medical care, and in Art. 30 from
The Public Health Insurance Act regulates the elaboration of regional health cards, which according to Art. 31
contain the geographical boundaries of the health regions; type, number, activity and
the distribution of the medical establishments under art. 29, ал. | in the area; countof doctors
and dentists in outpatient care by specialties. Based on the data

from the regional health cards a National Health Card is prepared, which is
approves by a decision of the Council of Ministers on a proposal of the Minister of
Healthcare. This was done with Decision He 688 of the Council of Ministers of 4.11.1999 for
approval of the National Health Card of the Republic of Bulgaria.

In view of the above, I consider that the text of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 ”of the decisions
for privatization and all actions related to the privatization procedure are
take from: municipal councils after approval or on the proposal of the Minister of
Healthcare - for the medical establishments with municipal participation, carrying out “ev
compliance with national health interests. The text of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPL
not only is it not in conflict with the principles of Art. 4, items 2 and 4 of the EHMS, aev
compliance with them, as both texts of the Charter state that
the powers of local self-government bodies are determined by law and
may be restricted only within the law.

With the provision of art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPA, the executive power has the opportunity
to pursue a national health policy with a view to accessibility and to protect
the interests of the population in the country and the municipality.

Y1. Upon the request based on Art. 22, para. 3 of the Constitutional Court Act
the acts of the Minister of Health for transformation to be announced
for void:

I consider that the request for annulment of the acts of the Minister of
healthcare on the grounds of art. 22, para. 3 of the Constitutional Court Act is
inadmissible. The powers of the Constitutional Court are exhaustively stated in
Art. 149 of the Constitution. According to Art. 149, para. 1, item 2 of the Constitution
The Constitutional Court rules on a request for> establishment of
unconstitutionality of the laws and other acts of the National Assembly,
as well as the acts of the President. Repeal of acts issued by the Minister of
health care is not within the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court.

The acts of the Minister of Health for the transformation of the existing ones
Health establishments that are issued in implementation of the PHA cannot be
acts issued by an incompetent body within the meaning of Art. 22, para. 3 of the Law on
The Constitutional Court, At the time of their issuance the Minister of
healthcare was competent to issue them.

In view of this and in view of the provision of Art. 151, para. 2 of the Constitution please yes
you are not considering the request.

Notwithstanding the above, I believe that according to Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution
The Supreme Administrative Court rules on disputes over the legality of
the acts of the Council of Ministers and of the ministers, as well as of other acts specified
in the law. Pursuant to Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution and Art. 5, para. | of the Law on
The Supreme Administrative Court has jurisdiction to rule on
the request made.

In this regard, I note that with decision Xe 7208 of 29.11.2000 under Adm. e.
4432/2000, the Supreme Administrative Court, 5-member panel, with upheld
transformation order issued by the Minister of Health on the grounds
Art. 102, para. | from 3ZLZ. In the same sense is decision 6419 of 24.10.2000 under Adm. e.
Ho 2479/2000 of the Supreme Administrative Court, W Division (entered into force).
I enclose copies of the above court decisions of the SAC.

Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

In view of the above, please reject the request of the people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of the provisions of
Art. 101, para. You 5, art. 102, para. Gichl. 104, para. | of the Medical Establishments Act,
as well as the request for establishing non-compliance with Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 regarding
the words “after approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health” of
the same law as the European Charter of Local Self-Government.

Applications:
1. decisions Xe 7208 of 29.11.2000 and 6419 of 24.10.2000 of the SAC;

2. 480 pcs. court decisions for entry in the Commercial Register of
the transformed health facilities.
OPINION

To the Committee on Health, Youth and Sport

SUBJECT: Ruling of the Constitutional Court of 18 January 2001, p
which the National Assembly was constituted as a party under K. D. M 18
of 2000 to establish> unconstitutionality and
non - compliance with the European Charter of Local Self - Government of
provisions of the Medical Establishments Act (promulgated, SG No. 62/99,
ed. and add., no. 88/99, 113/99, 36/2000 and 65/2000).

At its meeting held on 31 January 2001, the Commission on
health, youth and sports discussed sent with
order of the Speaker of the National Assembly He 150 - 01-24 /
24.01.2001 materials on K.D. X 18 of 2000

Members of the Commission, examining the arguments put forward in
request to the Constitutional Court, consider that they are unfounded under
the following considerations:

1> The Law on Medical Establishments (3LZ) provides
existing public health facilities for hospital care yes
be transformed into “medical establishments - sole proprietorships
companies ”, according to the provisions of art. 101, para. 1 of the PPL.
The transformation is carried out by order of the Minister of
health, providing that the ownership of capital
is acquired by the municipality on whose territory the seat is located

of the company, and the rights over it are exercised by
the respective municipal council (art. 101, para. 6). Only the status of
the considered public health establishments - they are transformed by
those supported by the budget, in companies whose capital is
municipal property.

2. This order for the transformation of public health facilities does not
contradicts the constitutional norm guaranteeing the right of
owned by the municipalities and does not violate the principles of local
self-government in so far as the powers relating to the
the transformation and closure of public health facilities always
belonged to the central executive, not to
municipal councils. According to the Public Health Act, competent
to make such decisions is the Council of Ministers, based on
proposal of the Minister of Health. It is in this order
the existing public health establishments have been established, which are subject to
of transformation in accordance with the provisions of the Medical Act
establishments.

3. The allegation that the act of transformation,
The Minister of Health "disposes" of a municipal one
property. It is explicitly provided both in the law and in the orders for
transformation that the sole owner of the capital is the municipality.
The Minister of Health does not change the holder of
ownership, but only changes the status of public health
establishment within its explicitly provided by law
competence.

4. For the purposes of health reform, the law provides rules for
establishment of “Medical establishments” with mixed participation - 51 90 state
and 4990 municipal. These rules do not contradict the Constitution,
because the powers of the local authorities are not taken away
self-government and their property rights are not affected.

5. Regarding the statement that art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPA in the part “after
approval or on the proposal of the Minister of Health ”
contradicts the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECHR),
we consider it unfounded, as the text of this international
act clearly states that “local governments
have full freedom to take the initiative within the law
on any matter not excluded from their competence or
delegated to another authority ”(Art. 4, item 2 of the ECMS).

Taking into account the above arguments and on the basis of
the debates held, the views expressed and what was done
vote, the Committee on Health, Youth and Sport by 10
the votes "for", 3 "against" and without "abstentions" took the following

ANSWER:

The request to declare it unconstitutional and inconsistent
of the European Charter of Local Self - Government
Art. 101, para and 5, Article 102, para. 1, art. 104, para and Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of
The law on medical establishments is unfounded and should not be

respected. A
OPINION

of the National Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria,
interested party in constitutional case 18/2000 on the list of
Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria

Honorable Constitutional Judges,

In connection with the ruling provided to us by the Constitutional Court by
January 18, 2001 opportunity, we express an opinion on a constitutional case
Xe18 / 2000, formed at the request of a group of MPs from XXXUSH
National Assembly to declare the provisions of
Article 101, para. and 5, art. 102, para 1, art. 104, para | and Art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after
approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the Law on
the medical establishments (Promulgated, SG, issue 62/1999, amended and supplemented, SG No. 88 and 113/1999,
No. 36 and 65/2000) and the inconsistency of Art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after
approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the same law
with the European Charter of Local Self-Government (promulgated SG, issue 46/2000).

By upholding in principle the considerations of unconstitutionality of
the above texts and the legal arguments attached to them, the National
Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria expresses the following reasons in support of
the request of a group of MPs:

1. Poal. 1 ial. 5 of Art. 101 от3ЛЗ

1.1. Poal. 1

The transformation of the existing public health facilities into a hospital
assistance - the regional hospitals in the sense of art. 9, para. 3, vol. | from LPH and
dispensaries - in sole proprietorships by order of the Minister of
The healthcare is in contradiction with art. 17, para. 1 ial. 4, Art. Article 19 106 from
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Considerations:

is the Regional Hospitals within the meaning of Art. 9, para. 3, vol. | from LPH, are public
municipal property, according to 4. 7 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of
The Law on Local Self-Government and Local Administration and Art. 2, para. 1, item bi
item 9 of the Municipal Property Act.

Art. 17, para. 1 of the Constitution guarantees and protects the right to property. C
the act of transformation into a commercial company of a legal entity by
non - owner of the property or its representative (in this case the Minister
acts on behalf of the Council of Ministers, which represents the executive
power of the State) intervenes in the regime of property and breaks down
- by virtue of the PPA - the constitutional guarantee and protection of the right of
property.

is In parallel with this, the provision of Art. 17, para. 4 of
The Constitution, as already with a separate law - the Law on Municipal Property
- the regime of municipal property has been determined. It is by virtue of
constitutional provision, the Municipal Property Act is special on
in respect of any other law concerning the management and disposal of
municipal property. In this sense, the provision of Art. 101, para. | from ZLZ is
unconstitutional, giving powers to dispose of municipal
property of an administrative body of the executive state power. On these
considerations, para. | of Art. 105 also contradicts Art. 106 of the Constitution of R.
Bulgaria.

is the contradiction of art. | of Art. 101 of the Law on Public Health with Art. 19 of the Constitution
expresses a violation of the constitutional guarantee, creating equal legal
business conditions of all legal entities and the prevention of
abuse of monopoly.

1.2. According to para. 5
There is a contradiction with Art. 17,

 

.Tial. 5 of the Constitution.

Considerations:

f. Even if it is assumed that with the inclusion of municipal property in the capital
of a commercial company there is a hypothesis of forced expropriation of
municipal property (which is inadmissible for public municipal property),
then this case is decided by other rules related to the replacement or
the gratuitous transfer of properties. In this sense, there is a contradiction with
Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution.

f The guaranteed constitutional right to property of
the municipalities with art. 17, para. | of the Constitution, as the provision of Art. 101, para. 5
unequivocally transfers municipal property to shareholder ownership
companies in which the municipality is not the sole owner of capital.

2. Poal. 1 of Art. 102 от3ЛЗ
The provision contradicts Art. 17, para. You art. 106 of the Constitution

Considerations:

is the existing public health facilities for outpatient care under
the meaning of Art. 8, item 2, letters “c” and “d” it. 3 of the PPA are municipal property,
according to Article 7 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Local Law
self-government and local administration and art. 2, para. 1, item bit. 9 of the Law on
municipal property.

There is a contradiction with art. 17, para. of the Constitution for reasons
set out in item 1.1.

is Paragraph | of Art. 102 of the PPA gives powers to the Council of Ministers, c
the person of the Minister of Health to dispose of a municipal
property. There is a contradiction with Art. 106 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria,
which determines the powers of the Council of Ministers. Disposal of municipal
property is beyond these powers.

3. Poal. 1 of Art. 104 от3ЛЗ

The provision contradicts Art. 17, para. | ial. 4 of the Constitution.

Considerations:

Transformation of property from municipal to private - property
of a commercial company - an incompetent body, ie from non - owner of
the property to be transferred. In addition to infringing the guaranteed rights of.
property with para. 1 of Art. 17 of the Constitution, this provision carries out
forced expropriation of property, which is not even for state and
municipal needs, as the property is included in the capital of a private company
subject - a commercial company. This factual situation cannot be reduced
and to the actual composition of the formation of a property company
municipal property, as it is not carried out by the competent body - municipal
advice.

4. Pot.Z of para. 1 of Art. 109 of 3LZ
The provision contradicts Art. 138 and Art. 140 and of Art. 17, para. 3 of
The Constitution.

The medical establishments with municipal participation, providing hospital care do not
are only the regional and inter-regional hospitals in which there is also state participation,
but also the hospital areas, which are entirely municipal property.

By virtue of the constitutional provision of Art. 138, local authority
self-government of the municipality is the municipal council. The municipality has its right to
property, which he uses in the interest of the territorial community, according to art.

140 of the Constitution, ie the municipal council is the body competent to take
decisions on the disposal of company property,
when he is the sole owner of the capital in it.

The principle of the inviolability of private property is also violated,
guaranteed by Art. 17, para. 3 of the Constitution. Once the municipal property
is included in the capital of a commercial company, even though it was its owner
the respective Bulgarian municipality, it already becomes the property of the commercial one
company, i.e. private property. In this sense, none other than the sole proprietor
owner of the capital can not make decisions on privatization - transactions with
company share - because the ownership of the property is already on the commercial
company - private property of a private legal entity.

The created complex factual composition of the decision for privatization
of shares of a commercial company with a sole owner of the capital in it -
the municipality - after approval or at the proposal of an administrative body of
the executive power - is in obvious and inadmissible contradiction not only with
the provisions of art. 138 and 140 of the Constitution, but also with the provisions of Art. 17, para.
Zichl. 19 of the Basic Law of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Honorable Constitutional Judges,

In view of the stated motives and in view of the considerations of a group of people
representatives, "please respect" the request for "announcement of
unconstitutionality of para. | ial. 5 of Art. 101, para. 1 of Art. 102, para. | of Art.
104, para. 1, item 3 of Art. 109 in the part “after approval or upon proposal of
the Minister of Health ”of the Medical Establishments Act (Promulgated, SG, iss.
62/1999, amended and ext. SG, no. 88 and 113/1999, no. 36 and 65/2000).

With your decision you will restore the constitutional principles of guarantee
and protection of property rights, the determination of the regime of the objects of
state and municipal property by law, to guarantee all legal
persons of equal legal conditions of economic activity and prevention of
abuse. with the monopoly, on the protection of the investments of the Bulgarians
citizens and legal entities, the right of the municipality to its property and the
the inviolability of private property.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Georgi Markov The provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament is unconstitutional. The principles of equality of citizens before the law have been violated - Art. 6, para 2 of the Constitution. .127, item 1 and art. 31, para 1 of the basic law. In Decision № 3/1998 under c.d. № 1/1998, which I also voted for, it was accepted that criminal irresponsibility outside the cases specified in the Constitution cannot be established by law.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Lyudmil Neykov I find the request of the Prosecutor General to establish the unconstitutionality of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament to be justified due to the following: 1. The status of the candidate for MP and his / her deputy is not and cannot be the same, as the social significance of these two categories is different. In this regard, unjustifiably by the impugned legal provision, which creates a privilege, this status is equated.2. The sign "social status" in the sense of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution also characterizes the candidate for Member of Parliament, due to which he falls within the prohibition to use privileges according to the said constitutional provision. Criminal inviolability is a privilege that is based on the social status that the person occupies precisely in his capacity as a candidate for Member of Parliament, due to which he falls within the restrictions under Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution for obtaining privileges.3. The thesis that "the initiation of criminal proceedings or the detention of a candidate for Member of Parliament or his / her representative will irreparably infringe their rights…" is valid only in the one-sided consideration of the affected personal interests. whether the privilege of a candidate for Member of Parliament does not unjustifiably prevent the commencement and completion of criminal prosecution against a candidate suspected of a crime who has violated the law in violation of his constitutional obligation to comply with the laws and respect the rights and legitimate interests of others; .58, para 1 of the Constitution. In this case there is a competition between constitutional values, in which of a higher order is the one that protects the public (fight against crime) before personal interests - a principle contrary to which the attacked legal provision, which is why it is a counterconstriction institutional.4. The status of the candidate for Member of Parliament is different from that of the Member of Parliament, the Minister, the Constitutional Judge, etc. The Constitution protects them with immunity due to their official position, as the attribute "official position" is not among those explicitly listed in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, on the basis of which there is a prohibition on obtaining privileges. Therefore, based on the official position, which is beyond the exhaustively listed in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the constitutional legislator has provided only a few cases of immunity from prosecution, which do not include candidates for MPs and their deputies. The provision of such a privilege by law, which ignores the restrictions on the acquisition of privileges raised by Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as is the case, is unconstitutional.5. By Decision № 3/1998 under Code of Criminal Procedure № 1/1998 it was accepted that criminal irresponsibility, outside the cases specified in the Constitution, cannot be established by law. The decision adopted by this decision is in violation of this practice of the Constitutional Court.
Dissenting opinion of Judges Nedelcho Beronov, Margarita Zlatareva and Vasil Gotsev The provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament, promulgated, SG No. 37 of 13 April 2001, the compliance of which with the Constitution is subject to consideration in the present case, in fact introduces criminal immunity of the candidates and their deputies, analogous to that of the Members of Parliament under Article 70 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court has had the opportunity to rule in a definite manner that the exceptions to the rule that any person , who has committed a crime, is subject to criminal prosecution, are explicitly provided for in the Constitution - Decision № 3 of 7.03.1998 under c.d. № 1/98, promulgated, SG No. 29/1998. The decision lists the constitutionally admissible exceptions: Art. 70 - for the Members of Parliament; Art. 103, para 4 - for the President of the Republic and the Vice-President; 132, para 1 - for the judges, prosecutors and investigators, and art. 147, para 6 - for the members of the Constitutional Court. The Constitution does not allow other exceptions for criminal immunity. Those who express the dissenting opinion believe that there is no reason for the Constitutional Court to deviate from this unanimous opinion and now in the present case to rule in the opposite sense. Candidates for deputies and their deputies are participants in the election process to whom the law cannot created the privilege of not complying with penal provisions just because of their quality. Every citizen is obliged to observe the laws of the country and to respect the rights and legitimate interests of others - an obligation proclaimed by Article 58, paragraph 1 of the Constitution as one of the main constitutional obligations of citizens. Legislative extension of criminal immunity, albeit for a certain period, for persons holding various positions in the state system, beyond those constitutionally listed or even participating in the election process, means a violation of this constitutional obligation. This also means unequal treatment of citizens before the law. which violates another constitutionally guaranteed rule, raised in Art. 6, para 2, assoc. second of the Constitution as a basic constitutional principle. It cannot yet be argued that bringing the candidates to justice will violate their passive suffrage, because the question will immediately arise - and does not violate the right of victims to seek justice from the judiciary in the broadest sense? meaning of the word protection of their violated rights from the actions of the persons with the provided privilege (we are talking about a private prosecutor and a civil plaintiff in a criminal proceeding). Of course, for advocates even this consideration cannot be upheld. If it is assumed that the registration of persons in the lists of candidates and deputies changes their status compared to other citizens, it means that these persons occupy a social position, which is one of the social features, exhaustively listed in Art. 6, para 2, assoc. second of the Constitution and for which the creation of privileges is explicitly prohibited. In this sense is also Decision № 14/92, promulgated, SG, issue 93 of 1992. The only explanation and justification for violating the principle of equality before the law on criminal inviolability can be found only in the constitutionally established circle of persons enjoying immunity. (Although the content of the notion of immunity from the various constitutionally designated persons enshrined in the Constitution varies, it includes criminal inviolability everywhere.) Recognition that a law may expand the circle of such persons runs the risk of any parliamentary majority being able to determine various positions and terms in which criminal prosecution is excluded. The shorter or longer term of the criminal inviolability granted by law cannot be an argument for constitutionality of the legal provision. It is not a consideration in favor of compliance of the provision with the Constitution and the fact that it was introduced as Article 45, paragraph 1 of the Law on Election of the Grand National Assembly (promulgated, SG No. 28/1990) and is repeated in the various electoral laws to date. In view of the above considerations, the authors of the dissenting opinion accept that the provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament contradicts constitutional principles and basic constitutionally regulated obligations of citizens. to declare it unconstitutional.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Rumen YankovThe dissenting opinion refers to Art. 3, para. 3, Art. 6d of the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (SG, DB 63). ., amended, issue 69/99 and issue 24/2001), as well as that the right to protection is not provided in the law. According to art. 3, para 3 of the VAT Act, Art. 3, para. 2, item 2 it is stated that they are not full-time or part-time associates of a certain category of persons, the disclosure of specific data or information about which will harm a specific interest, important for the national security of the country or endanger the life and personal freedom of an individual. The next paragraph 3 of Article 3 provides for the possibility of the names of the persons described in paragraph 2 of the same text to be announced regardless of the conditions specified therein, if they are registered as candidates in elections for President and Vice President, MPs or municipal councilors and mayors. Or the candidacy of the associates for participation in the elections is not a counter-motive for the fact that other people's interests may be affected. Thus formulated, the provision contradicts Article 28 of the Constitution - "Everyone has the right to life". The right to life belongs to the category of inalienable rights. Restrictions are inadmissible on any occasion. There is also a contradiction with Article 30 of the Constitution - "Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security." The right to personal liberty and security may be restricted under conditions and in accordance with the procedure established by law. It is obvious that according to the text there is a possibility for a third person to be deprived of liberty without the prerequisites for this. There is a contradiction with Article 41 of the Constitution - "Everyone has the right to seek, receive and impart information" of the hypothesis “specific interest, important for the national security” it should be borne in mind that the legislator in art. 3, para 3 has considered it acceptable to sacrifice security in the interest of the information of the society in the course of the election process. But the content of the provision of Article 41 of the Constitution is in the opposite sense - that the right to information must be limited so as not to affect national security. Contradiction of Article 6d of the ACSD with another Article 4, paragraph 1 of the ConstitutionArticle 6d of the law provides for the possibility of the persons whose names are included in the report under Art. 3, para 1, item 3 in contradiction with the law, to file against the commission under Art. 4, para 1 a claim for compensation under the Liability Act of the state for damages caused to citizens (ZODVPG). For its part, Article 1 of ZODVPG shows that the state is liable for damages to the affected individuals by illegal acts, actions or omissions of its bodies and officials during or on the occasion of performance of administrative activity. Liability can be sought, but only after the repeal of the acts in the appropriate order. And as it was said, with regard to the act of the commission under art. 4, para 1 no procedure is provided, through which to achieve its annulment. From this point of view, there will be a procedural obstacle to seeking compensation in court. Indeed, the text of the law provides in two cases that a direct action is admissible - if illegal actions or omissions are to be revoked, or the act of the administration is null and void. The report of the commission, which may affect rights and interests, cannot be qualified as an action (the law does not mean a legal but a factual action), the illegality of which should be brought directly before the courts. It is rare for a null and void administrative act to be directly assessed by a court. But even if this hypothesis is feasible, it will apply to a negligible number of cases. it can be seen that the provisions in the two laws contain contradictory provisions and do not regulate public relations without any problems. Such norms cannot be an attribute of the rule of law. The right to protection provided for in Article 56 and Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution has been violated. As a start, it should be noted that the right to protection against honor, dignity and the good name of the citizens, indicated in art. 32, para 1 of the Constitution, is preventive. This means that the person appointed as a full-time or part-time associate must be given the opportunity to initially challenge the findings of the commission under Article 4, paragraph 1 of the law. The scheme for disclosure of cooperation under the law can be summarized: of the data from the heads of the departments indicated in art. 4e the commission under art. 4, para 1 shall present to the commission under art. 4d, para 1 the data established for each of the referred persons under art. 5, para 2 or 3, and for the cases under art. 4e, para 3, item 2 and a proposal for disclosure of the name of the person. It is followed by a decision of the commission under Art. 4, para 2 for disclosure of the name of the full-time or part-time associate, but without his participation in both phases of the inspection. Indeed, an exception under Article 5, paragraph 3, item 6 is provided for non-staff associates, for whom the incriminating data are unconvincing, to be invited, but only if they agree, to sign a declaration that they have cooperated and to give written explanations. It can be seen that the participation of the affected person is not envisaged in the procedure, and insofar as it is provided, it is not to defend, but to make a possible confession serving the idea of ​​the law. The right to protection under Article 56 of the Constitution is defined repeatedly - the existence of a clear and simplified procedure in which those concerned can present factual and legal arguments. Along with it, the right to protection under Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution as part of the general right to protection under Article 56 is also a fundamental constitutional right. If it is assumed that the act of the commission under Art. Moreover, not only is no protection provided, but any participation in the proceedings for the issuance of the act has been denied. In this case, no considerations of national security, infringement of foreign rights and interests of a higher order may be put forward, which would require the restriction of the right to defense. The reference in the judgment in the present case to the provision of Article 7 of the Constitution is an unconvincing argument, as it reproduces a basic principle and not a specific way of protection.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Stefanka Stoyanova I consider unconstitutional § 5 of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents of the former State Security (ZIDZDDBDS) in the part of art. 3, para 3 regarding the persons under para 2, item 2. According to art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution, the right to seek, receive and disseminate information may not be directed against the rights and good of other citizens, as well as against national security, public order, public health and morals. It is limited by the constitutional provision itself, which proclaims it, and the introduction of the restriction protects other duly listed values. Obviously due to its presence, with § 5 ZIDZDDBDS in the part of art. 3, para 2, item 2 it is accepted not to disclose the names of persons who were full-time or part-time collaborators of the former State Security or of the former Intelligence Department of the General Staff, if they are not such collaborators of the names indicated in the text. services and if the disclosure of specific data or information about them will harm a specific interest relevant to the national security of the country or will endanger the life and personal freedom of an individual. The conclusion follows from the thus reproduced content of the text, which on the grounds provided for in the Constitution and in order to protect constitutional interests, determines the persons whose names are not disclosed. However, the protection of these interests is excluded by the following provision of the challenged law - para. .3. According to her, the names of the persons concerned are disclosed regardless of the damage to a specific interest of national security or the threat to life and personal liberty of an individual, once the same persons are registered as candidates for President and Vice President, Peoples' Representatives or municipal councilors and mayors. Thus, contrary to Art. 41, para 1, sentence 2 of the Constitution, the right provided by this para 3 to search, receive and disseminate information turns out to be directed against such constitutional priorities as the national security of the country, the right to life and personal freedom. It is precisely this contradiction that I find to justify the existence of unconstitutionality.
OPINION Hu ma

From Prof. DSc Dimitar Kolarov - President of the Union of
foresters in Bulgaria

Subject: Declaring unconstitutionality of Art. 4, Art. 7
para 1, art. 29, Art. Article 30 31 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act

Dear Constitutional Judges,

The Union of Foresters in Bulgaria, after getting acquainted with
the request of a group of MPs for
the unconstitutionality of the above articles of the Hunting Act and
game conservation (ZLOD) considers that:

1. art. 4 fromZLOD

None of the MPs disputes the fact that
the game is state property. Once this is a fact,
the legislator has the right to assign to a state body, c
case the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to implement
state policy in the field of hunting management
holding, as well as the control over the management of the game. This is not
monopoly, and the right to interpret the government to be assigned
of a state body in view of its responsibility before
the public in our country on the application of ZLOD.

2. Art. 7 para 1 of ZLOD

In the provision of art. 7, para the legislator has accepted that the hunting
area of ​​the country is distributed to hunting areas,
regardless of fund boundaries and forest ownership and
water areas. MPs believe this
contradicts the Constitution, which states that the right of
property and inheritance are guaranteed and protected by law.

According to the hunting science and practice the game ss
manages on a population basis. This means that the game is
breeds and inhabits areas where there are different species
property - private, state, municipal, monastery, school.
In addition, the game migrates and cannot be nailed
specific hunting area in order to seek a connection with
forest and land ownership. The legislator, proceeding from
these circumstances to protect the equality of all
properties, has created Art. 38 in ZLOD. The law also provides
payment of damages caused by the game to the property. Except
that the owners of forests and lands receive money
compensation for the fact that their property falls into hunting
area. All this shows that the villain does not contradict
The Constitution does not harm the interests of the> different
owners of forests and lands in terms of hunting.

Art. 29, Art. 30 and Art. 31 of ZLOD

In them the legislator regulates the right of association of
persons who have acquired the right to hunt. The suspicions of
MPs in terms of what hunters can
to be left without hunting areas and that they will not be able to exercise there
your right to economic activity and hunting trip.

With the entry into force of a new Law on Persons and Families - SG
no. 8181/2000, in the section for "associations", all are regulated
rights and obligations of the persons who formed such associations. Yes
that the Hunting Squad, or Hunting Squads, forming
associations, creating their own statutes, can be sure that in
their area, the hunting areas will be managed by them and
they will take care of the management, reproduction, protection and
the use of game.
OPINION

of the Ministerial Council of the Republic of Bulgaria under
Constitutional case He 3 of 2001

SUBJECT: the request of 70 MPs from
ХХХуШ National Assembly for the establishment of
contrary to the constitutionality of Art. 4, Art. 7,
al. You art. 29, 30 and 381 of the Hunting Act
protection of wild boar (SG, issue 78 opa 2000)

Seventy people represented by ХХХУШГ Народно
Assembly requested the Op Consolation Council of the Republic
Bulgaria establishing a breakthroughConstitutionality of Art. 4,
Art. 7, para. 1, art. 29, 30 and 31 of the Law on Lobs for Game Protection (SG,
no. 78 of 2000 a.).

By order of the Conspiracy Court op 22 February
2001 on the Constitutional Case He 3 op 2001 Minister
Sowsh is Konshitpupran As a party to the case, Bub
Relationship with which we express the following opinion:

Under Art. 4 op ZLOD

The assertion of the group is unfounded and unmoved
folk "presented for" stitching 9
provision of Art. 4. Texts of art. 19, para. 2 op
of the Republic of Bulgaria proclaims the right to free business
initiative. It belongs, As bizar para. 2 of Art. 19, on bsichka.
citizens and legal entities engaged in business
activity. These people could have a monopoly position.
The state bodies do not carry out economic activity due to
Which cannot be said of “state monopoly

institution ”. With Art. 4 of ZLOD of the Ministry of Agriculture 1.

forests are assigned only authoritative functions in the organization
of the hunting area n management of the hunting farm p
Control over the management of the property, which are state-owned
function. C 1, w 1 of the Additional Provision is given
definition of the term “lobe economy” As a complex
activities related to the management, protection and use
of the game ... ”It is this Complex of activities that is managed by p
Controlled by the Ministry of Agriculture worse, and op
the definition of the term “management of dpbecha” (art. 338 opa
ZLOD) it is seen that "management of dpbecha" is not an element of opa
the right of ownership over the game per hour persons, and there is
nature of the implementation of the state policy 6 guards
area, which undoubtedly should be carried out op state
authority - the Ministry of Agriculture, through general authorities -
National Department of Pottery, State Sheep Breeding
stations in the breeding areas. To these bodies is ZLOD
Assigned KonKreshnai functions. No specific laws are indicated
texts from which it can be concluded that all activities -
the management of the hunting farm, spopanisbanesho of the game,
The control over the management, the organization of the hunting
area, will be carried out by the same “officials”. IN
different government agencies employ different employees.
The allegation that Art. 4 op ZLOD contradicts art. 5, para. 1
The constitution cannot be shared either. He didn't flinch
arguments for violating the supremacy of the Constitution
6 What is the contradiction of Art. 4 op ZLOD s
Constipation. It is not clear why it is claimed to be stitched.
"compulsory creation of public relations,
Which did not exist before. It is Art. 58, para. 1 op
The Constitution presupposes "coercion" by obliging the citizens
to observe and implement the Constitution of the Law. To

The adoption of ZLOD was not public relations

"Because they did not exist before" and were not settled
the amended Law on the Hunting Farm op 1982 for. He is not
reflected the changes that took place 6 socio-economic
Life in the country did not create an opportunity for development
free economic initiative does not guarantee
toat on the Control and protection of the game Kasho nationally
wealth, As a result of Koesho poaching has become 6
national problem, which led to a reduction in the number of p
endangering the gene pool, did not respect the changes in the forms
of property, as well as the constitutional right to free
association. In order to settle public relations 1
given 6 compliance with Constitutive principles 1 norm
of the Constitution of 1991, it was necessary to adopt a new one
Law for hunting.

It is also alleged that Art. 4 op ZLOD contradicts art. 4,
al. 2 og Konstishutsiasha, shi Kato did not guarantee free
development of civil society. On the contrary - a number
The repealed Law on the Hunting Farm
chaha of art. 4, para. 2 of the Constitution, as it was not allowed
structures civil society - non-profit associations,
to participate in the management of the frontier management areas. This
the right was given only to the Bulgarian Hunting and Fishing Union
(Which is an amateur, not a branch professional organization) for
all hunting areas 6 countries, except
the state forest phono. Only to this organization by law
was given the right to participate with a representative n 6 Hunting Council
(Article 14, paragraph 2).

The only non-governmental organization that
The Hunting Act gave the right to participate 6
conducting the state polispica 6 hunting area
economy and management, organize p

Coordinated the hunting industry.

Fisheries Union (BLRS) (Article 18, paragraph 2). Immediate protection of
the game, apart from the state authorities, ascended to the same
organization. The imposition of the sanction under Art. 22, para. 1 se
agreed again with BLRS. This legislative approach set 6
unequal position register under the Law on Persons 1
family non-profit associations and BLRS, and by restriction
the right to hunt only for the members of BLRS became meaningless
the establishment of PP membership in another association ”due to
the inability to exercise this right. It is this approach that
abandoned 8 EVIL, stabbed 00 limitation razvbitiesho of
civil society.

The law on hunting and conservation of upbecha specifies
activity, Copto can perform associations with poetic
purpose, and limits the state functions, which you say to be them
delegated, Shei Kasho cannot impose obligations on them
finance state activities with their own funds.
In this way, a balance is achieved between rights and obligations
them.

Under Art. 7, para. 1

It is alleged that the provision of Art. 7, para. 1 op ZLOD
proshpbvorechi to art. 17 op Konstishutsiasha, shi Kato limited
I make private owners of forests, As if without a will
their forests are locked 6 lobster economic areas.

Article 2 op ZLOD has declared the game 6 Republic of Bulgaria for
private state property, and para. 1 of Art. 3 defines ochbecha Kato
national wealth. The owner - the state, no doubt
must take all due care to protect
national wealth 6 interest of citizens in society.
The need to create an organization of the hunting area is
determines the need to preserve and enrich
grandfather diversity, improving the condition of

habitats, game reproduction, laundry

biological minimum, information on allowable stocks,
the rational and sustainable use of game. Zoning of
the territory of the foreigner for the needs described above is not
the only bid zoning of the sharishoria of the Republic
Bulgaria in itself does not presuppose the expression of the will of
Citizens are owners, especially since there is no legal text that
to restrict the rights of forest owners in a way that
Who will hinder their use. The constitutional
legislator has proclaimed the principle of inviolability of
private property, 6 Koisho, however, did not contain pdeyasha that no
exercise # can be restricted. A number of laws
contain various restrictions. Geh Repeganz - ZaKonash for
contains a chapter on property restrictions,
Providing that for public works purposes restrictions on
property is governed by separate laws, as it is
suitable 6 EVIL. Except shoVva as far as the owner
should draw a restriction (and on the basis of the fact that
the eyeball moves freely, independently), expressed
mainly 8 right of passage through his property, is carried out under
approved op minister of agriculture n worse pili op
the head of the regional department of burning plans. These
plans can be appealed against interested persons pro
conditions on the beam of the Administrative Act
production. A fine shall be issued in writing for conducting a fine
permit, which as an administrative aKSh can be
appealed. These are forms of defense against> unreasonable
restricting the rights of owners.

The question arises, which requires revocation of the right to
the private owner of the forests to declare them a protected area, yes
draw up its own management plan. Declaring protected
territorially regulated 6 chapters of the Law on

protected terishorich n is pre-stitched 8 Competence of

the Minister of Environment and Water, not the owners of
burns 1 land. In Art. 14 op Law on Protected Territories are
imposed restrictions on the sample of forest and land owners
8 zashshpenishe peritorish and this peKkssh is not obyaben for
protiKkonstsputsionny. There is no legal obstacle to the owner to
draw up your own game management plan if
he raises one, but not the game - owned by the state.

It is incorrectly assumed that 6 forest area - hourly
property under a contract with the state forestry, ”will
another private company settled down, which will manage the game ”and will
restricts the rights of the private owner. Article 34 op ZLOD
refers to the face, You manage the game, one op What is given with
general wording "oruvi legal entities". According to Art. 36, para. 1
from ZLOD to the shaky persons the management of the game is provided 6
orchard breeding sections through Competition. Requirements For persons 6
dependence on the necessity of performing the Specific
activities you will set yourself as conditions of the Competition in each
a separate case. Dibechovodishche sections are> differentiated 8
the boundaries of state forestry (art. 10 op ZLOD), a
the state forestries are bodies of the National Government
in the forests and carry out the management of the state forest background,
security and control on the pot and lands op forest background and
On burns created on lands and land phono (art. 22 124
of the Worse Act). Therefore, the game areas,
detached Within the boundaries of state forestry, are not
located in the forest - private property, and the hypothesis of
Art. 36 is not applicable for sewing, therefore does not limit the sample
of the private owner.

Under Art. 29, 30 131

We do not share the statement that Art. 29, 30 and 81 op ZLOD
contradict the proclaimed op. Art. 44 op Conspiracy prabo

of association, As n that the activity of

the current hunting association. We hear that the EVIL has strictly observed
the principle of the right of free association as opposed to op
the legal regulation of art. 24 of the amended Hunting Act
holding, which give the right to hunt only to members of the
BLRS. It is this six hundred stitches that you constitutionally limit
the right of assembly. This is unconstitutional
restriction was overcome by ZLOD, Like Bulgarian citizens
you can freely choose 8 What praborganizational
Structures to be based on the principle of voluntariness. The right
of free springing is not only guaranteed by Art. 29, 30 and 31 opa
ZLOD, but through the imperative provision of 8 3, para. 4 op
The transitional and final provisions of the law establish
prohibition of lobster associations under Art. 30 to refuse membership of
persons who have acquired the right to hunt. The right of free association is
protected and with the provision of 8 5 of the Transitional and final
provisions, which provides equal conditions for registration of
hunter associations.

It is unreasonably claimed that Art. 31, para, 2 of ZLOD
contradicts Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constituent Assembly. Restrictions on
Art. 31, para. 2 op ZLOD are 8 in unison with Art. 3, para. 2 op Law for
non-profit legal entities, which provides that
restrictions 6 the activity of non-profit legal entities
may be determined only by law, As done in Art. 31,
al. 2 op ZLOD. According to the Prince, the Law on Legal Entities with
non-profit purpose will allow you to wipe 6 limited cases
business activity subject to various other restrictions.
In addition, the principle of Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constitution is directed
To the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria - para. 1 of Art. 19, 1
the creation and ranking of equal probationary conditions for
economic activity should be provided before bsichKko of
business entities, not on the sheza, Koshsho are after all.

non-profit goals n tasks.

Postabenishe In Art. 29 and 30 requirements
activity of the association to be related to reproduction,
management, protection and use of the forest are in view
assisting the state 6 the implementation of these activities.
As a state function, and when these activities were carried out
As economic activity, ZLOD observes the principle of art. 19, para. 1 op.
Constitutionalist for the right to free economic initiative and no
restricts it by any legal norms.

In view of the above, we consider that the provisions of Art. 4,
Art. 7, para. And Art. 29, 30 131 of the Law on Hunting and Game Conservation
contradict the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria due to
Which the Constitutional Court should reject the request of
the group of folk ancestors to establish the mehnasha

protiVonKonstsputsionnost.
FROM THE UNION FOR NATURE PROTECTION
Sofia, 12 Hr. Belchev Str., Tel. 987 95 36

SUBJECT: LAW ON HUNTING AND CONSERVATION
(Promulgated in the State Gazette, issue 78/2000)

Mr President,

The Union for Nature Protection is a non-governmental environmental union
organization founded by patriotic Bulgarian scientists and specialists in 1928
year.

The main activity of the Union is the protection of flora, fauna and the whole
nature of the country. That is why we are particularly sensitive to
the adopted Law on Hunting and Game Protection. «

The Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria (SLRB) performs useful
activity for protection of the ecological balance between the game wealth from
on the one hand and the use of game by hunting on the other. More than a century
SLRB educates thousands of Bulgarians in love with native nature and Bulgaria. He
is strongly connected with the traditions and education of the people towards patriotism and
nature.

We believe that the adopted law will cause serious and irreparable damage
damage to biodiversity and the balance in nature that will result

in turn and to the violation of the ecological state of the environment in
the country.

Some may take advantage of the omissions in the Act
unscrupulous persons and formations for personal illegal benefit.

In connection with some of the unconstitutional provisions in the Law on
hunting and game conservation, we make a number of notes and express the following
position:

The legal provision of art. 4 para. from ZLOD is in clear contradiction with
Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. It is also violated
a wonderful tradition, the Bulgarian hunters and fishermen, organized in SLRB
to take care of the preservation and enrichment of game species in
the country. In our opinion, the remaining of Art. 14 and Art. 15 is also inadmissible and unreasonable
of the Act, which should be repealed as undemocratic. The proposed
"Advisory body" and "Hunting Council" to it are administrative bodies,
which will be cumbersome and bureaucratic, made up of clean administrators.
In this way, a non-governmental organization is liquidated and created
state and administrative body. In our opinion, this is not in the spirit of
the democratic development of the country.

The provisions in Art. 29, 30 and 31 are also unconstitutional. With them
the established for many years structures of the hunting grounds are neglected
organizations in which hundreds of thousands of Bulgarians are members.

SLRB is the largest patriotic, environmental non-governmental organization
an organization that enjoys authority not only in Bulgaria but throughout
Europe. It is no coincidence that it was first adopted in similar European structures.

The adoption of this Law and its provisions lead to the factual
liquidation of SLRB. We ask why and who needs this?

In view of the above considerations, we offer to the Honorable
Constitutional Court to annul in the prescribed manner those texts of the Law on
hunting and game conservation, which are in sharp conflict with the Constitution
of the Republic of Bulgaria and limit the activity of the century-old public
a non - governmental organization of hunters and fishermen working actively for
breeding, reproduction and enrichment of the genetic fund of
game wealth and protection of native nature.
OPINION

by VENTSISLAV VARBANOV - Minister of Agriculture and Forestry
on constitutional case Ho 3/2001

SUBJECT: Declaring unconstitutionality of Art. 4,
Art. 7, para. 1, art. 29, Art. 30 Article 31 of the Hunting Act and
game conservation

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

At the request of a group of MPs, the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Bulgaria with its ruling of 22 February 2001
has admitted for consideration on the merits the request for the establishment of
unconstitutionality of provisions of the Hunting and Conservation Act
of game (ZLOD) - SG, no. 78 of 2000

The establishment of the unconstitutionality of
the following provisions of ZLOD: Art. 4, Art. 7, para. 1, art. 29, Art. Article 30 31.

Basically, the allegations of unconstitutionality are
reduce to the following:

- the group of MPs maintains the view that
the provision of art. 4 of ZLOD creates a state monopoly
institution (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) in a broad
activity involving the organization of the hunting area, the management of
the hunting farm and the control over the management of the game, with which
Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constitution;

- in the request to the Constitutional Court the group of deputies shall accept,
that with the texts of the attacked law new public ones are created
relations, which was in contradiction with the provision of Art. 5, para. | from
The Constitution;

- is attacked as an unconstitutional art. 7, para. | from ZLOD.
The said text is interpreted as deprivation of private rights
forest owners, ie as contrary to Art. 17, para. | from
The Constitution;

- the thesis is maintained that the provisions of Art. 29, Art. Article 30 Zot
ZLOD contradict Art. 12, para. | and Art. 44 of the Constitution,
regulating the right of association as a fundamental right of
citizens, as well as of Art. 19, para. | of the Constitution.

In connection with the request thus made for the announcement of
the unconstitutionality of these provisions, we express
the following opinion:

1. Art. 4 osZLOD

With Art. 4 of ZLOD the organization of the hunting area, the management
of the hunting farm and the control over the management of the game are
assigned to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. From the side of
importers complain that a monopoly of
government agency (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) c
a broad activity involving the organization of the hunting area,
the management of the hunting farm and the control of the management of
game.

We do not share the statements of the MPs
for the following reasons:

Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria provides
the law to create and guarantee to all citizens and legal entities
equal legal conditions for economic activity, preventing

abuse of monopoly, unfair competition and protection
consumer.

The challenged provision of Art. 4 of ZLOD does not create a monopoly
situation or unfair competition and does not impede the exercise
of the constitutionally established right of all citizens and
legal persons to enjoy equal rights in their participation in
the economic “life” of the country In the “discussion 94 of
the constitutionality of that provision should be maintained
given the polysubjectivity of the state - in its capacity of state
authority, on the one hand, and of an equal subject of private law, of
other By that provision, the legislature has assigned to
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry implementation of
the state policy in the field of the organization of the hunting area,
the management of the hunting farm and the control of the management of
game.

It should be noted that ZLOD is not the only law that
burdens the specific body of the executive power under
the organization and implementation of the state policy in the respective
area. The contested provision seeks to safeguard its development
the management of the indicated activities in the economic life of the country,
and is not an expression of a state monopoly. Moreover, because of the public
significance of these activities, the Constitution provides not only
the right of the state, through its executive bodies, to
exercises certain sovereign powers, but also an obligation
to do this - Art. 15 of the Constitution: “Art. 15. Republic of Bulgaria
ensures the protection and reproduction of the environment,
the maintenance and diversity of wildlife and the reasonable
use of the country's natural resources and resources ”. From another
country, the organization of the hunting area, the management of the hunting area
holding and control of game management are not economic
activities. The only legal definition of “monopoly
position ”evchl. 16, para. | of the Law on Protection of Competition: “Art.
16. (1) The position of an enterprise, which by law has
the exclusive right to carry out a certain type of economic activity. "

For the above reasons, we consider that the request to announce
of unconstitutionality of the provision of art. 4 of ZLOD, follows
to be rejected.

The allegation that Art. 4 of ZLOD contradicts Art. 5, para. | from
The Constitution, because existing public ones were not regulated

relations, we believe that should also not be supported. That's it
request, "MPs" do not indicate> specifically
contradiction of the provision of art. 4 with the text of the Constitution.
The provision of Art. 5, para. 1 of the Constitution establishes
the supremacy of the Constitution as law and says that other laws
they cannot contradict it. The general reference to the provision of Art.
5, para. 1 of the Constitution should not lead to
unconstitutionality of texts of individual laws. We accept for
the claim of the petitioners that with the text of art. 4 se
create new social relations that did not have their legal
regulation so far, as this contradicts Art. 5,
al. 1 of the Constitution. The hunting law in force before ZLOD
economy (LLS) - revoked, SG, no. 78 of 2000, gave legal regulation to
identical social relations. The adoption of the new Constitution
of the Republic of Bulgaria since 1991 imposed new principles in
the regulation of the existing public relations. This
necessitated the creation of new legislation in the various areas of
public life, including changes in rights and obligations
of legal entities.

2. Art. 7, para. Goth EVIL

With the provision of art. 7, para. | the legislator has accepted that the hunting
area of ​​the country is divided into hunting areas, regardless
from fund boundaries and land, forest and water ownership
areas. In his request to the Constitutional Court, the People's Group
representatives maintain the thesis that the provision of Art. 7, para. |
contradicts Art. 17, para. | of the Constitution, according to which the right to
property and inheritance are guaranteed and protected by law.

We consider the request to be unfounded for the following reasons:

The provision of Art. 7, para. | from ZLOD does not take away the rights of
forest owners, is in line with the constitutional norm for
inviolability of private property and is enforced by
the principle of guaranteeing and protecting the right to property,
established in Art. 17, para. | of the Constitution. From the interpretation of
the said provision and its systematic place in Chapter Two, Section
T "Organization of the hunting area", follows the conclusion that the target
"Regardless of fund boundaries and land ownership,
forests and water areas ”is in connection with one that is essentially pure
technological distribution of the hunting area and the delineation of

hunting areas. In this direction are the next paragraphs of
the attacked art. 7, para. | from ZLOD. For example, Art. 7, para. 5
regulates how the boundaries of hunting areas are determined
- on permanent terrain forms and plantations, compliant with the land ones
borders. On the other hand, the group of MPs do not report
public relations, subject to settlement by law -
"Property relations", protection and
the management of the game ...... ”.

The game, which is privately owned by the state, is managed on
population principle. This means that the game breeds and
inhabits areas - forests, lands and water areas, which fall into different
types of property - private, state, municipal.

In addition, the game migrates and cannot be fixed in

specific hunting area in order to seek a connection with
ownership of forests and lands. Outlining the boundaries of
hunting areas, there is no consequence of limiting
the right to property, much less its deprivation.
The legislator has taken into account that they fall within the boundaries of hunting areas
different type of property and for this, as a guarantee for the protection of
the right of ownership, has also introduced the provision of Art. 38: “Art. 38.
Construction of hunting facilities on lands and forests,
property of individuals and legal entities is carried out after
concluding a contract with them, in compliance with the requirements of
hunting management projects. ”
We do not accept the statement that “... in a forest area - private
property, under a contract with the forestry will be accommodated
another private company that will manage the game and dispose of it,
restricting the rights of the private owner of the forest ”Group
MPs do not further clarify concepts such as “will
accommodate ”and“ will be disposed of ”. State forestry will
grant only the right to manage the game
and to those specified in Art. 34 of the law subjects. The legislator is
provided, the specific conditions and the procedure for direct negotiation, as well as
and to conduct competitions to determine the entity that will
manages the game, to be regulated by the Regulations for application of the law.

Outside the subject of legal regulation remain the right to
ownership or limited real rights over land, forests and
water areas.

The conscientious reading of the provision of Art. 7, para. | in
connection with its systematic place in the law, as well as in connection with the circle

«

public relations, subject to settlement with ZLOD, in our opinion
excludes the validity of the request for unconstitutionality of
attacked text.

3. Art. 29, 30 and З1 from ЗЛОД

The applicants claim that the said provisions
substantially restricted the right of association by taking it away
the right of association of 220,000 Bulgarian citizens, as well as that
the law prohibited associations from conducting business
activity.

Art. 29 of ZLOD regulates the right of Bulgarian citizens,
acquired the right to hunt, to unite in a hunting party (the latter
is not a legal entity), in order to protect their interests for
management and protection of game in a hunting area.
The provision of Art. 30 further develops the idea by providing
the persons under art. 29 from neighboring hunting areas, in the area of
activity of one or several state forestries, to establish
hunting associations for the purpose of carrying out activities related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. They are registered under the Law on Persons and the Family - repealed. in
its part of art. 134-154 in SG, no. 81 of 2000, (current provisions
at the time of entry into force of ZLOD). The text of Art. 31 indicates that
the hunting associations under art. 30 may be established on a voluntary basis
principle of regional hunting associations and national hunting association,
who are registered under the Law on Persons and the Family - revoked. in the part
his of Art. 134-154 SG, no. 81 of 2000, but an act in force at the time of
the entry into force of ZLOD, but without the right to conduct business
activity.

We do not share the thesis stated in the request of the following
grounds:

According to Art. 12 of the Constitution, citizens' associations
serve to satisfy and protect their interests. Art. 44 from
The Constitution proclaims the principle of freedom of association, such as
provides for the law to determine the organizations that are subject to
registration, the procedure for their termination, as well as the relationship.
them with the state. The right of association is a fundamental right of the individual.
As the Constitutional Court has repeatedly emphasized, freedom
exercising the right of association is one of the most important

characteristics of the rule of law, the association is an expression and manifestation of
free will and free choice.

Art. 29, 30 and 31 absolutely proclaim the right of
free association, therefore it cannot be assumed that
these provisions are in conflict with the constitutional ones
requirements for freedom of association. In our opinion, restrictive on
with regard to the right of association as well as the exercise of the right
hunting, were the provisions of the repealed Hunting Act,
where the hunter could only be a citizen, which necessarily
is a member of one organization - the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in
Bulgaria, as the right to hunt was obligatorily tied to
membership of the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in
Republic of Bulgaria.

The submitters of the request claim that with the provisions of Art. 29, 30 and
31 established a ban on hunters' associations to perform
economic activity, which violated the provision of Art. 19, para. 2,
of the Constitution for equal legal conditions for economic activity.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry does not share the expressed in
the thesis request.

Art. 30, para. | of ZLOD explicitly provides that hunting associations
aim to carry out activities "related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. There is no ban on doing business for them. Without
the right to carry out economic activity are the regional hunting ones
associations and the national hunting association.

The introduction by the legislator of a restriction on regional and
the national hunting association to carry out economic activity is
a matter of legislative expediency.

Regional and national hunting associations are forms of
association for which the legislator establishes dispositiveness
about their existence. They are assigned representative,
advisory and support functions. Regional hunting associations and
the national hunting association is not directly involved in
game management. It should be borne in mind that regional and
national hunting associations are associations of hunting associations
under Art. 30 of ZLOD, which are legal entities. That means it is
it is unacceptable to claim that hunters' rights are being violated -
natural persons who unite in hunting associations under Art. 30. For

these hunting associations under Art. 30 the legislator does not introduce restrictions
to carry out economic activity.

The provision of Art. 44, para. 3 of the Constitution has provided
the right of the legislator, in his assessment of the expediency of.
determine the relations of the state with the associations, ie yes
give legal regulation of the type and nature of their performance
activity.

For the above reasons, we believe that this request should
be rejected. s

w
OPINION

OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY
AND THE GROUND REFORM

THEREFORE: Order of the Constitutional Court of
22.02.2001 with attached request of a group of people
representatives, with which “the National Assembly is
constituted as a party under the Ministry of Defense Code 3/2001. for
establishing the “unconstitutionality 9 of
provisions of the Hunting and Game Protection Act / promulgated,
SG, issue 78 of 2000 /

DEAR PRESIDENT,

Pursuant to Order K 850-01-76 of 23.02.2001
I present the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Forestry
land reform on constitutional case M 3/2001, for
establishing the unconstitutionality of provisions of the Law
for hunting and game protection / promulgated, SG, issue 2000 of 2000 /, as well as
follows:

T Under the first paragraph of the request regarding: art. 1, the words
"protection and management of game".

Art. 1 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act lists
exhaustive public relations, which are subject to the law.
It is systematically incorrect and impossible in terms of
legislative technique in Art. 1 to be regulated
the interrelations between those listed in Art. | public relations.

In Part 3, para. 2 and 3 the legislator very clearly said that
game conservation and management are inextricably linked
activities and that "game conservation is a fundamental principle for
organization of the hunting area, management of the hunting farm,
game management and exercise of the right to hunt ”, as well as
that “Conservation includes protection, security and control activities
in game management ”.

Therefore, the claim of the petitioners that in Art. 1
the expression "conservation and management of game" is an alogism which
is not in accordance with the constitution and violates it is unfounded and
should be disregarded.

2. Regarding Art. 4 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act
VZLOD.

It is alleged that Art. 4 of ZLOD contradicts Art. 19, para. 2, Art.
5, para. | ichl. 4, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The claim is unfounded and should be left without
respect for the following reasons:

A / Art. 4 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 19, para. 2 of the CRB.
Art. 4 of ZLOD regulates the state assigned by law
functions of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry regarding
the organization of the hunting area, the management of the hunting area
farm and the control of game management, which is in
in unison with 6 12 of the TFP of the same law and a natural consequence of
the fact that the game is private state property.
Naturally the owner and no one but the owner in
the person of the state through the MAF to be obliged by law to
carries out the organization of the hunting area, the management of
hunting management and game management control.
Nowhere in Art. 4 of ZLOD is not an economic activity that yes
is carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry.

On the other hand, Art. 19, para. 2 of the CRB ”creates and guarantees to
all citizens and legal entities have the same legal conditions for
economic activity by> preventing> the abuse of
monopoly, unfair competition and consumer protection ”.
According to Art. 16, para. 1 of the Competition Protection Act:
"The position of an enterprise, which by law has one, is monopolistic

the exclusive right to carry out a certain type of business
activity ”. Therefore, Art. 4 of ZLOD, which does not regulate
the performance of economic activities is incompatible with Art. 19, para. 2
of the Constitution.

B / Art. 4 does not contradict art. 5, para. | from KRB.

The allegation that Art. 4 of ZLOD contradicts Art. 5, para. | from
The Constitution, because existing public ones were not regulated
relationship is unfounded, unsubstantiated, does not correspond to the spirit and
the content of the law and should also be disregarded under
the following considerations:

This statement does not indicate a specific contradiction
of Art. 4 of ZLOD with a constitutional text. The provision of Art. 5,
al. | of the Constitution establishes the supremacy of the Constitution
as a law and says that other laws cannot contradict it.
The general reference to the provision of Art. 5, para. | of the Constitution
does not lead to unconstitutionality of texts of individual laws.

The statement and the conclusion are insolvent and without legal value,
made by him that with the text of Art. 4 new public ones are created
relations that did not exist before the adoption of ZLOD,
which contradicted Art. 5, para. | of the Constitution. The acting
before ZLOD, Law on the Hunting Economy (repealed, SG, issue 78 of 2000
d.), provided a legal framework for identical public relations.
The adoption of the new Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria from 1991
imposed new principles in regulating the existing ones
public relations. This necessitated> the creation of a new one
regulations in the various spheres of public life, in this
number and change of the rights and obligations of the legal entities.

C / Art. 4 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 4, para. 2 of the CRB.

The claim that for a century the legal framework is unfounded
has assigned activities for the creation of hunting areas and
the management of the hunting farm of the public organization
of hunters.

In Chapter U "Supervision and regulation of the hunting economy", members
27 and 28 of the Hunting Act / prom. SG no. 252 of February 8, 1926 /
read: “Art. 27. The general supervision of the hunting economy in the Kingdom
belongs to the Ministry of Agriculture and State Property
and its bodies, which monitor the implementation of this
law"

“Art. 28 General measures for the regulation of hunting
farm in the Kingdom are made by the hunting council at
the forest and hunting department. The decisions of the hunting council are subject

of implementation after their approval by the Minister of Agriculture and
state property. ”

Art. 5 of the Hunting Economy Act / promulgated, SG, iss. 91 of
1982, amended no. 13/97 and no. 11/98 / reads: “The development and
the management of the hunting farm is carried out by the state ”

From the texts quoted above, it is established that it is indisputable
in such a way that the state has not been deprived of its basic functions,
arising from the principle that game is state property.
Therefore, the conclusion made by the group of MPs
made the request to declare unconstitutional
texts from ZLOD that Art. 4 of the same contradicts Art. 4, para. 2 of
The Constitution is unfounded and should be left without
respect. In fact, the rights of citizens are guaranteed, as
such as both the right to hunt and the management and use of
the game has been donated to the citizens according to art. 30 34 36 50 51
68 and others.

3. Regarding art. 7, para. Goth EVIL

Art. 7, para. 1 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 17 from
The Constitution for the following reasons.

From the interpretation of that provision and its systematic
place in Chapter Two, Section 1 "Organization of the hunting area", follows
the conclusion that the text “regardless of the fund boundaries and
ownership of land, forests and water areas ”is in connection with
an essentially purely technological distribution of hunting
area and the delineation of hunting areas. They are in this direction
and the following paragraphs of the attacked art. 7, para. 1 of ZLOD. Yes
for example, Art. 7, para. 5 regulates how the boundaries of
hunting economic regions - by permanent terrain forms and plantations,
compliant with the land boundaries. On the other hand, importers
of the request, do not take into account the public relations subject to
settlement by law - “property relations,
the protection and management of the game ......

The game is managed on a population basis. This
means that the game breeds and inhabits areas - forests, lands and
water areas, which include different types of property - private,
state, municipal.

In addition, the game migrates and cannot be fixed in
a specific area or region to search for a connection to
ownership of forests and lands. Outlining the boundaries of
hunting areas, there is no consequence of limiting
the right to property, much less its deprivation.

The legislator has taken into account that they fall within the boundaries of hunting areas
different type of property and for this, as a guarantee for the protection of
the right of ownership, has also introduced the provisions of Art. 38
“Construction of hunting facilities on lands and forests,
property of individuals and legal entities is carried out after
concluding a contract with them, in compliance with the requirements of
hunting management projects ”. Moreover, according to 9, items 5, 6. “6”
of the TFP of ZLOD, which creates a new para. 2 of Art. 95 of the Law on
forests / SG no. 78 of 2000 / explicitly provides for their provision
to the owners of forests and lands part of the funds raised by
fees under Art. 52 and 53 of ZLOD.

The statement that “... in a forest area - private
property, under a contract with the forestry will be accommodated
another private company that will manage the game and will
orders, restricting the rights of the private owner of
the forest ”because he is not the owner of the game. The state
forestries will grant only the right to
management of the game and those specified in Art. 34 of the law
subjects, as in Art. 36, para. 2 states that “the state
forestry ”provide game management in
the hunting economic regions, outside those under par. | and Art. 35 of the hunters
associations under Art. 30 by direct negotiation ”, which guarantees
the rights of the hunters themselves. The legislator has provided specific
terms and conditions for direct negotiation, as well as for conducting
competitions to determine the entity that will manage the game in
other cases.

They remain outside the subject of legal regulation with ZLOD
the right of ownership or limited real rights over the lands,
forests and water areas.

The provision of Art. 7, para. | in connection with its systematic
place in the law, as well as in connection with the circle of public relations,
subject to settlement with ZLOD, excludes the validity of
the request for unconstitutionality of the attacked text.

«S

4. Art. 29, 30 and 31 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 44 from
The Constitution.

The petitioners claim that the above provisions
substantially restricted the right of association by taking it away
the right of association of 220,000 Bulgarian citizens, as well as that
the law prohibited associations from conducting business
activity.

This statement is absolutely unfounded in the following
considerations:

Art. 29 of ZLOD regulates the right of Bulgarian citizens,
acquired the right to hunt, to unite in a hunting party
(the latter is not a legal entity), in order to protect their interests
for management and protection of game in a hunting area.
The provision of Art. 30 further develops the idea by providing
the persons under art. 29 from neighboring hunting areas, in the area of
activity of one or several state forestries, to establish
hunting associations for the purpose of carrying out activities related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. They are registered under the Law on Persons and the Family - repealed.
in its part of art. 134-154 in SG, no. 81 of 2000, (in force
provisions at the time of entry into force of ZLOD). The text of
Art. 31 indicates that hunting associations Legal entities / may
establish on a voluntary basis regional hunting associations and
national hunting association, which are registered under the Law on
individuals and family - revoked in its part of art. 134-154 SG, no. 81 of
2000, but an act in force at the time of entry into force of ZLOD,
but without the right to conduct business.

Art. 29, 30 and 31 absolutely proclaim the right of
free association, therefore it cannot be assumed that
these provisions are in conflict with the constitutional ones
requirements for freedom of association. Restrictive on
with regard to the right of association as well as the exercise
the right to hunt, were the provisions of the repealed Hunting Act
farm, where the hunter could only be a citizen who
must be a member of one organization - the Union of Hunters and
fishermen in Bulgaria, and the right to hunt was mandatory
bound by the membership relationship with the Hunters' Union and
fishermen in the Republic of Bulgaria.

Art. 30, para. | of ZLOD explicitly provides that hunting
associations aim to carry out activities related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. There is no ban on doing business for them. Without
the right to carry out economic activity are the regional hunting ones
associations and the national hunting association.

The introduction by the legislator of a restriction on regional
and the national hunting associations to carry out economic activity is
a matter of legislative expediency.

Regional and national hunting associations are forms

of an association for which the legislator establishes

dispositiveness about their existence. They are assigned
representative, organizational, consultative, educational

and auxiliary functions. Regional hunting associations and
the national hunting association have nothing to do with
game management. The economic activity is carried out by
the hunters themselves in their associations under Art. 30 of ZLOD, where
this activity is actually performed. Otherwise, / as is
the request of the importers / in practice will be concentrated
business in the cap / regional and national
associations / s will in fact restrict or even deprive of the right to
economic activity the hunters themselves. This, by the way, was the practice of
a few years ago it had become the Hunting and Fishing Union
in practice in a commercial enterprise. To this kind of organization
importers are trying to push the legislation, which would
was a restoration of past and denied command-and-control
methods, rights and organizational forms.

It should be borne in mind that regional and national
hunting associations are associations of hunting associations under Art. 30 from
ZLOD, which are legal entities. That means it doesn't
infringe on the rights of hunters - individuals who are
unite in hunting associations under Art. 30. For these hunting associations
under Art. 30 the legislator does not introduce restrictions for the implementation of
economic activity.

The provision of Art. 44, para. 3 of the Constitution has provided
the right of the legislator, in his assessment of expediency
to determine the relations of the state with the associations, ie.
to give legal regulation of the type and nature of the performed
of which activity.

For the stated reasons the request for announcement
unconstitutionality of art. 29, 30 and 31 should also be
rejected.
Honorable gentlemen constitutional judges,

The organization of Bulgarian hunters and fishermen arises immediately
after the Liberation on the initiative of prominent Bulgarian Revivalists and
politicians, among whom stand out the names of Stefan Stambolov, Dimitar
Grekov, Dimitar Petkov, rightly called by Simeon Radev "builders
of modern Bulgaria ".

For more than a century, SLRB has existed and developed
as a democratic organization with a pronounced environmental character. Through
all this time the Union has upheld the democratic principles of its activity
and the regulation of the hunting business, the national character of the hunting movement. More with
its emergence became the initiator of the adoption of hunting legislation and all
legislative changes in the regime of the hunting economy after the Liberation
are associated with the name of the hunting organization. Therefore, the legal status of the Hunter
Union is the inalienable institution of all hunting laws in the recent history of
Bulgarian State.

With the restoration of democracy in Bulgaria, the Union adopted
the line of a radical and comprehensive renewal of a return to traditions and
the revival of its national and original character. In the complex and difficult

conditions for building a democratic society in our country SLRB seeks to
defend its place as an independent, non-political and patriotic organization,
which protects the conservation and sporting interests of its members,
recognizes and affirms the humane values ​​of modern civilization.

Unfortunately, these efforts and aspirations were not understood by some
politicians in the new conditions who adopted a line of destabilization and
liquidation of the hunting and fishing organization without complying with it
historical past and merits for the protection of wild fauna.

This is not the first time that the problems of the hunting organization have been raised
consideration before you, the representatives of the only institution in
the state that ensures the supremacy of the Constitution and the principle of
the separation of powers, as fundamental in building ours
country. As early as 1992, at the request of 51 MPs, it was
initiated constitutional case Mo 17/1992, which sought the annulment of
Art. 24 of the old Law on Hunting, which is the basis of the law
status of the Hunting Union. By ruling Mo 7 / 21.07.1992, the Constitutional Court
rejected that request as inadmissible and refused to examine it at
being.

In 1994, a group of MPs requested an interpretation from
The Constitutional Court of 6 3, para. | in connection with Art. 5, para. 2 of the Constitution,
accusing SLRB of monopolizing the right of association in a certain
sphere of activity. Constitutional case Ke 4/1994 was initiated, according to which
the court assessed its admissibility positively and examined it on the merits. IN
Decision Mo 10 / 06.10.1994, published in SG, no. 57/1994, you gave
a positive answer in two main directions: first it is not necessary
the possibility of association is necessarily provided for in "law or other
enactment. Citizens are free to determine the subject of the association and
the goals they set "; and secondly," It is possible to entrust the implementation of

certain state functions of citizens' associations ... and even
desirable - for example in the protection and reproduction of the environment ...

Those proclaimed by you with the cited decision are clear and definite
constitutional principles have been violated in the regulation of hunting
activity in the Law on Hunting and Game Protection - is manipulated and
restricts the right of association of citizens in Art. 29, 30, 31 and 32 of the same
law and take away all state functions of the hunting organization, as
introduces a state monopoly in the hunting industry - Art. 4 of ZLOD.

A third attempt was made in 1996 by a group of deputies in front of you for
instituting a constitutional case in which they attacked each other as unconstitutional
Tutorial Art. 6, 13, 24 of the repealed Hunting Act, but until the formation of
no constitutional case was reached as three of the signatories withdrew
their signatures and their number fell below the norm set in Art. 150 from
The Constitution.

Honorable gentlemen constitutional judges,

For the fourth time since the establishment of the Constitutional Court before you
raises the problem of assessing the constitutionality of legal
situations in the field of hunting. The difference from the other three cases
is that in the current case 70 MPs want your intervention to
the constitutional rights of the 220,000 members of our organization are protected
to associate freely and, according to the historical tradition, to
manage and protect game as a national treasure, as with an unfair
by law, these rights were taken away or unjustifiably restricted.

We fully share the conclusion of the deputies that Art. 4, para. 1 THIEF against-
contradicts a number of basic provisions of the Constitution. The first of these is
granting a monopoly position to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry,

by granting him exclusive and monopoly rights over the "organization of
hunting area, management of the hunting farm and the management of
the cited text is not only in gross and obvious contradiction with art. 19, para 1
of the Constitution, but breaks with the current legislative practice of centuries
action of the Hunting Union and its structures. All applicable laws until
have now assigned certain functions of the organization, the conditions for
management and protection of the game, which they have successfully performed and are
led to the preservation and enrichment of game stocks in Bulgaria.
Assigning these activities only to government officials from the Ministry of Agriculture and Food
The National Development Fund will nationalize this national wealth in contradiction with the declared one

and a policy of privatization of state property and
management of civil society organizations, such as the Union of Hunters and

fishermen in Bulgaria. It is obvious that with the criticized unconstitutional
provision (Art. 4, para. 1 ZLOD) establishes and aims at the nationalization of
game wealth, which is a national asset and generally nationalized
is inadmissible.

In this spirit are other provisions (Art. 14, Art. 15), through which all the basic
important activities in the future will be carried out only by government officials and
are a direct continuation of the proclaimed monopoly of Art. 4, para. 1. Therefore
The 70 MPs are quite right that its unconstitutional
calls into question the constitutionality of all texts,
accepted in fulfillment of the principles announced by him.

We cannot fail to point out, although the other texts are not disputed
by the deputies, except for art. Chapter 7 | that the State 's borrowing of
almost the entire perimeter of economic activity of its structures, in time,
when its policy is to get rid of all its uncharacteristic functions.

In clear contradiction with the constitutional provision of Art. 44, which
stipulates that Citizens are free to associate "are the accepted

redbi vchlchl. 29, 30, 31 and 5 EVIL. They withdraw the provision provided by the
freedom of association and determines how, with what types of associations and
in what terms the hunters can associate.

The centuries-old ones are purposefully and unjustifiably neglected
structures of the Hunting Organization with over 120,000 hunters and their established

traditions of game management, reproduction and protection, and c
these unconstitutional norms order the creation of new structures
"regional hunting associations and a national hunting association", which is in clear
contrary to the “free association of citizens” adopted by the Constitution
".

Nowhere in the newly created law is written and regulated legal succession.
of the centuries-old structures - hunting party, hunting company, Union
of hunters who have established their long existence through
public benefit and socially recognized activity. Deprivation of succession
of the newly created structures is clearly intended to be presented afterwards
claims to the property of the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria and
of hunting societies, which was created by generations of hunters and fishermen in
for more than a century. There were even intentions of the state
officials and politicians to sell the exhibits of the National Museum
of the hunting organization, among which are our world records and with that to be
encroach on our national hunting dignity.

There is no doubt, in our view, that, contrary to the Constitution,
classed by the newly adopted Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities
goal principles for the activities of civil associations is the provision of
Art. 31, para. 2 ZLOD, where it is explicitly written that the newly created structures
"regional hunting associations and the national hunting association
are without the right to conduct business. "This prohibition is contrary to
the constitutional norm incl. 19, art. 2 "The law creates and guarantees to

all citizens and legal entities have the same legal conditions for
lordly activity ... ".

Then on what grounds was this ban introduced in the law, yet
more that its importers are extremely aware that with the accumulated
financial resources from companies and firms, currently from ten
For decades, the national hunters ’organization has organized and
There are 28 hunting and fish farms in which they are bred and raised
and provide hunters and fishermen with thousands of pheasants, partridges, ducks,
fish - trout, carp and other species, which are free
enriches game and fish fauna without any involvement
the state in financing these activities. The huge ones
funds invested in them are not within the financial capabilities of which and
to be a separate association of hunters. It is obvious that with this staging in
The law aims to plunder these game and fish farms.
in favor of private and company interests.

The prohibitions established in ZLOD are also a constant contradiction with the new ones
provisions in the newly adopted Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities
purpose, where incl. 3, para. It is explicitly stated that "Legal entities
non-profit may carry out additional business
activity only if it is related to the subject of the main activity, for
which are registered ... In the same article of this special law raft. 2
it is ruled that "restrictions on activities and means ... may
to be determined only by law. ". This text speaks only of

"restrictions", but not for prohibitions.

Honorable gentlemen constitutional judges,

In view of the above, we definitely consider the translated
considerations and arguments for the unconstitutionality of the above

the request of the 70 MPs texts of the Hunting Act and
game conservation are sufficient and they should be repealed by
The Constitutional Court to enable an institution of
civil society, as represented by those organized in SLRB
hunters freely and legally continue to exist in
the formations - companies created by them more than a century ago
and companies, for the fulfillment of the noble public benefit goal -
production, protection and preservation of national wealth -
game and fish, and for the development of hunting.
Dear Mr. President,

According to the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, game is a national treasure.
Current practice confirms that the conservation, feeding and resettlement of game
is an extremely labor-intensive activity, which is carried out successfully in the narrowest
cooperation of the National Development Fund with the centennial organization of hunters and fishermen.

Feeding the game in winter conditions is unthinkable without constant care
and the active work of hunters.

Selective shooting, breeding of game with high trophy qualities,
the regulation of the sex ratio of animal populations is possible only with
the participation of hunters who have the necessary knowledge and experience in breeding.

Poaching is a terrible scourge for game, and the fight against it is becoming increasingly difficult
dangerous. With the limited number of hunting and forest guards, the fight against poaching
can be successful only with the active participation of one hundred and twenty thousand organized
hunters - members of SLRB.

According to forest statistics from April 2000 until now in different regions of the country
1796 wolves, 19537 jackals, 31661 foxes and over 21730 stray dogs roam and
others that inflict great mischief on the game. Without the active participation of hunters in the
It is unthinkable to fight them to exterminate the predators.

The dedicated work of the hunters for the protection, breeding

net and resettlement of game.

The achievements in this direction are definite. Without close and active cooperation
of the National Development Fund with the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria is impossible to develop
of a modern and highly productive game farm, which is one of the first
places in Europe.

In connection with certain provisions of the Hunting and Game Protection Act (promulgated SG,
no. 78/2000) we consider it necessary to express the following opinion:

1. In our opinion, the legal provision of Art. 4 of ZLOD is in contradiction with art. 4,
al. 2 of the Constitution, as it seizes the functions and rights of the public organization of
hunters (SLRB) and assigns this activity (according to art. 34) - the management of the game, to
performed by other Bulgarian legal entities. Probably referring to her entry
the protection of some economic groups and illegitimate entities. This circumstance
as a clause raises special concerns for the future of the hunting farm in Bulgaria!

2. It is inadmissible with the provisions of ZLOD to proceed to the compulsory one
illegal destruction of the organizational structure of the current association -
SLRB, by seizing the activity (and bioecological!).

In view of the above considerations, we propose that the Constitutional Court annul it
in the established order those texts from the Law for hunting and protection of the game, which enter into
sharp contradiction with the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and restrict the exercise
of economic activity by the century-old public organization of hunters (SLRB), related
with priority to the breeding, reproduction and enrichment of the genetic fund, and

the biodiversity of animal populations and the conservation of game wealth.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Rumen YankovAccording to Article 2, paragraph 1, item II of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (SDBRB) for the Supreme Judicial Council (SJC). A similar problem was the subject of Interpretative Decision № 17 under c.d. № 13/1995. This requires that some of its reasons and operative part be reproduced verbatim: “The SJC, as a governing body of the judiciary, has a budget that is an integral part of the budget of the judiciary, but is independent of other budgets of the other judicial bodies of the same system ”. And more: “In principle, it is impossible to unite the budget with the budget of the body managed by it, ie. the body, the addressee of the administrative acts ”, taking into account in this case a court, a prosecutor's office and an investigation. The following is the interpretation that the SJC has an independent budget, which must be voted by the National Assembly in its entirety as the budget of a body of the judiciary. In addition, the refusal of the legislator to include in the current budget law for 1995 “on an independent basis (independent position) the budget of the SJC” was declared unconstitutional. The acts of interpretation are voluntary. They are embedded in the legal order and become part of it, binding not only the interested addressees, but also the body that issued them. Not only considerations of legal prestige, but mainly requirements for legal order and stability oblige the Constitutional Court to comply with its previous decision, insofar as there are no cardinal grounds to reassess the original opinion. Thus, the previous interpretation is not compliant, because with this decision the court rejects a similar request challenging a legal norm which still does not set a separate amount for the SJC's budget. In fact, a guarantee for the normal functioning not only of the SJC, but also of the judiciary as a whole has been denied. It should be borne in mind that the availability of funds for the SJC can be established and justified only by a statutory amount. Therefore, the reasoning of today's decision can not be accepted, containing the imaginary finding that the availability of funds "was evident from the will of the legislator in the adoption of the provision in question." Under Article 2, paragraph 2 of the LBRB, the provision is in the sense that a subsidy in the budget of the judiciary in the amount of 90% of the determined amount under para 1, as the remaining 10% shall be provided in case the budget deficit approved by art. 3, para 3 is not exceeded. The judiciary has an independent budget - art. .117, para 3 of the Constitution. As is accepted in all acts of the Constitutional Court regarding the budget of the judiciary, the annual budgets of the state must provide funds for the functioning of state institutions, including the bodies of the judiciary. Once voted, its independent budget implies non-interference by external bodies in all its phases. Obviously, the attacked norm affects the main one - the hatching phase. Specifically, the adopted in full amount of the budget in Article 1 of the law, which is assumed to meet the needs of the judiciary to the maximum extent, pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 2 is implemented in a reduced amount. In addition, its implementation is made dependent on the occurrence of the deferral condition - if the deficit provided for in Article 1, paragraph 3 at the end of the year is not exceeded. In practice, the disputed provision creates an opportunity to reduce the amounts for current maintenance of the judiciary throughout the year, as the amount of the annual deficit is obviously determined at the end of the year. Under Article 2, paragraph 8 of the Law on the Judiciary, the norm reads: the judiciary are housed in buildings owned by municipalities or the state, they do not pay rent. ”The provision contradicts Article 17, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, namely that the right to property and inheritance is guaranteed and protected by law and secondly. place that the municipality has its own property, which it uses in its own interest - Article 140 of the Constitution. There is no doubt that the law encroaches on one of the powers of the right of ownership - the use. In fact, municipalities are deprived of the opportunity to collect income from their own property. A burden has been created, which is unconstitutional. According to Article 10, paragraph 1 of the Law on Social Assistance, the text is in the sense that when compiling the municipal budgets for 2001, the amount of funds for social benefits under the Social Assistance Act and the Birth Promotion Decree cannot to be less than twice the amount of the targeted subsidies for social benefits provided by Art. 9, para 1. On the occasion of this provision it is imperative to take into account the norm of Art. 47, para 1 of the Constitution that along with The upbringing and upbringing of the children is supported by the state and art. 51, para 2, that the persons, temporarily left without work, have the right along with the social insurance and to social assistance. From the content of art. 10, para 1 ZUDBRB sees that additional financial obligations have been imposed on municipalities with the current budget law. However, the Constitution itself in Article 60 provides as the only possibility for imposing a property obligation in favor of the state budget the payment of taxes. In this case, the state transfers part of its social obligations provided for in the Constitution, but the municipalities. In this way, it is possible to transfer its obligations to other public entities through the arbitrary adoption of laws. The list identifies which extra-budgetary accounts continue to operate. Those not included in the list are ruled to have dropped the legal basis and the consequences referred to in the next § 10 apply. The possibility for extra-budgetary accounts and funds to exist is provided by the Municipal Budgets Act (SMA). Their management is carried out not by another, but by the bodies of local self-government - art. 31, para 1 of the Law on Local Self-Government. The importance of the municipal budgets has imposed the guarantee for their stability provided by law. Paragraph 2 of the RZZZOB states that its provisions may be amended, supplemented only by a special law or by the Law on the Structure of the State Budget. Obviously, this rule is not followed. In practice, without the order provided for in § 2, the rules of the structural law with another for the current year are repealed. The conclusion is that the provision of Art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution has not been complied with. This is because part of the extra-budgetary accounts according to Art. individuals and legal entities and organizations for the benefit of the municipalities. It encroaches on property, which is the property of the municipality, an action inadmissible in view of the provision of art. 17, para 5 of the basic law. § 20 of the Law on Municipalities para 2 of the State Budget Law: in the cases when the budgetary institutions, financed from the state budget, are housed in buildings owned by the municipalities, they should not pay rents. Therefore, the above art. 2, para 8 of the State Budget Law applies in full to the present case.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Georgi Markov The courts are called upon to exercise control over the legality of the acts and actions of the administrative bodies - Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. In a state governed by the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Basic Law, judicial acts are binding on the parties to the case and enjoy the force of res judicata. In view of this, the decisions of the SAC, by which acts of the DEC and the CEC were revoked and declared null and void, are binding on these bodies and are enforceable. instead, Irena Marinova-Varadinova was registered as the leader of the NMSS coalition list, and was announced by the Supreme Administrative Court with effective court decisions. This means that these acts of the election administration did not give rise to any legal consequences. Such is the distinguishing feature of the null and void administrative acts. - Razgrad is registered Ventseslav Dimitrov. Therefore, it was he who should have been entered in the ballot of this coalition, not Irena Marinova - Varadinova. Article 74, paragraph 2 of the Law on Public Procurement was violated, according to which the identity of the names and the order of the persons in the candidate list It should be borne in mind that the election administration has also violated Decision № 10/97 under c.d. № 14/97 of the Constitutional Court. This decision, which is binding on all authorities in the country, assumes that the quality of a person as an associate of the State Security should be determined only in connection with the existence of indisputable evidence of deliberate delivery of information. The reference file is not in itself such evidence, because not only the current associates were registered and registered, but also persons prepared for recruitment, as well as persons whose recruitment did not take place (Art. 50 of the Instruction for the operational report of DS - I - 20 / 20.01.78). That is why Ventseslav Dimitrov cannot be considered an associate of the State Security and there is no legal basis for his withdrawal as a leader from the list by the NMSS coalition, as it does not appear in the report under Article 6, paragraph 2, items 1, 5. and 7 of the VAT Act, as required by Article 48, paragraph 5 of the Law on Public Procurement.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Lyudmil Neykov I find illegal the election of Irena Ivanova Marinova - Varadinova, appointed MP by Decision of the CEC № 348 of June 20, 2001 in the XXXIX National Assembly by the coalition "National Movement Simeon II" in the 18th multi-member electorate district - Razgrad. Decision № 90 of 9.06.2001 of the District Election Commission - Razgrad for annulment of the registration of Ventsislav Assenov Dimitrov, candidate for MP from the NMSS list was declared null and void by a decision of the SAC of 15 June 2001. This eliminated the grounds for the additional registration of Irena Marinova - Varadinova in the place of Ventsislav Dimitrov, as the annulled act of the REC - Razgrad practically did not give rise to any legal consequences. In view of this, the candidate for MP Irena Marinova - Varadinova was illegally subsequently included as a leader in the ballot of the NMSS coalition, with which she voted. The fact that she was voted with the ballot in which she appears as a leader and received the appropriate number of votes required for the election, can not remedy the offense by including it in the ballot, respectively. to give legal form to her choice. Therefore, her choice cannot be recognized as lawful. It is illegal.
CENTRAL ELECTION COMMISSION

OPINION

Subject: Constitutional case Ho 13 of 3 July 2001 and
constitutional case Ho 14 of 5 July 2001 in a dispute over
the legality of the election of Irena Ivanova Marinova -
Varadinova - announced as an elected MP by
coalition "National Movement Simeon II" in the 18th
multi-member constituency - Razgrad of the produced
on June 17, 2001 elections for the XXXXH National Assembly

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of 9 July 2001
and an order of the Constitutional Court of 12 July 2001,
The Central Election Commission is constituted as
party to constitutional case Ho 13 of 3 July 2001 and
constitutional case Ho 14 of 5 July 2001

At its meeting of 23 July 2001,
The Central Election Commission discussed the sent by
letter Ho 13 / cd. 13/2001 of 13.07.2001 of the Chairman

of the Constitutional Court materials under c.d. 13/2001 and cd.
14/2001

The Central Election Commission considered | for
unfounded request of a group of MPs from
39th National Assembly and the request of the General Assembly of
judges of the Supreme Administrative Court for announcement
illegality of the election of Irena Ivanova Marinova -
Varadinova for MP from the National Coalition
Simeon II movement in the 18th multi-member election
district - Razgrad.

the requests argue that
the illegality of the choice is conditioned by
incorrect cancellation of Wenceslav's registration
Assenov Dimitrov as a candidate for MP in
the list of the NMSS coalition in the 18th MIR Razgrad with a decision of
The District Election Commission - Razgrad He 90 / 09.06.2001
year. RIK-Razgrad was filed against this decision
complaint from V. Dimitrov to the CEC and the latter left it without
consideration as inadmissible by decision Ho 330 / 13.06.2001.
The Central Election Commission shall support those set out in
this decision considerations that V. Dimitrov is not
legitimized under the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament
to appeal against a decision of a district election commission under
registration of the candidate list of the pre-election list
coalition.

Elections for the National Assembly are held on
proportional system with party electoral lists and
coalitions registered in multi-member constituencies
- Article b, paragraph | ZINP. According to Article 43, paragraph | by law candidates
for MPs are nominated by the parties or
coalitions and the registration of candidate lists
performed by the respective DEC at the request of the central
leadership of the party or coalition - art. 45, para 1, item 1
ZINP. These and other provisions of the law define as
participant in the electoral process political force - party or

coalition. Both her participation in the elections depends on her will,
as well as how many and which specific citizens will be
included in its candidate list and registered for
candidates for MPs. In the beginning, this will is
expresses with the proposal under art. 45 para. v.1 ZINP. The law
however, it also provided for the possibility of political force to
reassess and change your original will and ask
cancellation of the registration of a person from her candidate list
given data on his cooperation with the former State
security - art. 48, para 5 of ZINP. The purpose of is obvious
the legislator to protect the interests of the political force for
successful performance in the election process by securing
maximize her ability to rise as candidates for
MPs persons with indisputable morals and public
authority. The election process is a competition, understandable and
the aspiration of each of the participants in it to
achieve the maximum election result and a prerequisite for this
are the persons included in the candidate list and their personal ones
qualities. In these circumstances and considerations arising from
proportional elections, it is inadmissible for an individual to
imposes its will on the party or coalition to join
his in her candidate list. Such a person is not a participant in
the election process on its own grounds and is not
legitimized to "challenge" the actions of the electorate
administration - DEC and CEC.

It is also argued that by canceling
V. Dimitrov's registration violated the constitutional
his right to be elected a Member of Parliament - Art. 65, para.
1 of the Constitution. The OPPORTUNITY provided in the text
there is every Bulgarian citizen over the age of 21 who
has no other citizenship, is not placed under guardianship and is not
serves a sentence of imprisonment. To become
however, this possibility in PERSONAL RIGHT of a particular
citizen is a necessary act of personification, which is

left to the will of the political force only. By
In the opinion of Ventsislav Dimitrov, such an act is missing after
the request made by the NMSS coalition for annulment of
his registration.

Arguments have also been made for violating the law
due to cancellation of the registration of V. Dimitrov with
reference to Decision He 10 of the Constitutional Court of
September 22, 1997 in the constitutional case Ho 14/1997.
The arguments are untenable. The current norm of art. 48,
para 5 ZINP gives the right to the political subject to request
cancellation of the registration of a person from her candidate list
and at the same time within the period specified by law to request
registration of a new candidate for this position in the list.

The NMSS Coalition has exercised this legal right and
on this basis RIK-Razgrad has canceled the registration of
the candidate Ventsislav Dimitrov with his Decision Ho 90 from
09.06.2001, and with a separate decision it allowed
the registration of the new candidate nominated by the NMSS coalition -
Irena Varadinova, as this subsequent decision was not
appealed to the CEC. This decision to register Irena
Varadinova was not subject to inspection in the proceedings
according to adm. case 4806/2001 of the Supreme Administrative Court, on which administratively
case neither REC-Razgrad nor the interested parties -
NMSS coalition and the registered new candidate - Irena
Varadinova, participated.

In exercising its powers under Art. 45, para. 8
from ZINP the district election commission-Razgrad as
the registering authority was not empowered to assess whether
for Ventsislav Dimitrov there are data for cooperation with
the former DS, how these data are objectified and whether they
actually establish such cooperation. The judgment
for this it is given to the political force. For the purpose of

the legislator with the introduction of this text to be protected
the interests of the political formation as a participant in
the election “process, it is said> above. Namely> these
legislative considerations do not allow by analogy
the implementation of the decision of the Constitutional Court He 10/1997
accepted that the designation of a person as “full-time or
part-time employee ”of the former State Security follows
to be established with a report under Art. 6, para. 2 by the commission under art. 4
al. | on the basis of decisions of the commission under art. 4d, para from
The Law on Access to Documents of the Former State
security and former> Intelligence Management of
The General Staff. With the report under art. 6, para 2 of the law
reveal the names of persons with PROVEN
BELONGING to the former DS. This feature
however, it is radically different from the qualification given in Article 48,
para 5 ZINP - a person for whom DATA FOR
COOPERATION with the former DS.

The establishment of cooperation data is carried out
according to the procedures and through the ones indicated in art. 5 from
VAT and OTHER documents and materials. This establishment
only determines the content of public information
contained in the report under Art. 6, para. 2 of the same law.

In the cases under Art. 48, para. 5 ZINP the political force has
right to self - assessment of the findings of
Commission data on cooperation of one person with the former
State security. If such a conclusion is made and this
motivates her request to cancel the registration of one
person, there are no preconditions for discrediting his name in
society, because by dropping it off the candidate list,

the possibility for public announcement of his name is also eliminated -
Article 29, paragraph 2 of the ZINP.

The Central Election Commission "supports and
its opinion expressed in a cassation appeal of 19 June 2001,
that the judicial control over the final acts of the CEC under
Art. 24, para. 3 of the ZINP is inadmissible.

By decision Ho 340 / 16.06.2001, the CEC accepted that at
voting used printed ballots, independently
of the subsequent changes that occurred in the candidate lists.
The decision was not appealed and was binding on the participants in
the election process. Despite the existence of this decision CEC
made a check of the received election materials from
voting in 28 of the 44 polling stations in Europe, the results of which
are related to the result in the 18th multi-member election
district - Razgrad. It was found that everywhere voting,
which was conducted with the bulletin of the NMSS coalition, such as
leader of the list is Irena Varadinova.
ADDITIONAL REASONS AND CONSIDERATIONS

According to CD Ho 13 and M 14 0t 2001 by Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

You have allowed for consideration a dispute over the legality of the election of the people
representative. The lawfulness dispute involves deciding what is legal
situation and everything else will result from that. The legal situation always
is only one, only. Two opposing truths in law cannot
coexist and Ina poui: sipa (the court knows the laws).

In this presentation, I will present to you only the facts in their
chronology, I will also dwell on the constitutional principles and legal provisions
as I am convinced that the only thing you will be guided by in the judgment is

the will to obey the law and restore the law.

When and how was my registration canceled?

This happened with decision 90 /09.06.t.g. of RIK-Razgrad. National movement
Simeon II (NMSS) submitted an application the day before requesting this
on the grounds of art. 48, para 5 of ZINP. By virtue of this text for me should.
there is “data on the agent's past” in order to have valid legal consequences.
As a Member of Parliament in several successive parliaments, I have been screened
from commissions with different statutes, and in the latter case - under the VAT Act

I appeared in the report with the so-called informers. I will not expose here

in front of you in detail everything that was reported in the media to my address, but
it became public later that I was developed by two without my knowledge
management, but I was removed from the report because of “conflictual nature, not amenable to
processing, talks a lot and is unmanageable ”. However, someone left some cardboard.
I enclose a statement of K Chakarov, unknown to me, on the issue,
published in the press.

It is quite natural when I was deregistered in such a disgraceful way
from RIK Razgrad, at least to defend my name and guided by faith,
that you cannot be disenfranchised in a country without guilt, I appealed

the decision of the REC-Razgrad before the CEC, which (the CEC) decided by decision 330 that I

 

I have no legal interest in this !!! And who else should have a legal interest?
Isn't my name affected? And how? - The Commission under the VAT Act is not for me
announced in the report on the contributors, no evidence of links with
DS, and I really did not cooperate! What could I do in this one?
situation, in addition to referring the dispute to the Supreme Administrative Court (SAC). Until this one
moment I did not know the details of your decision 10/97, but I assure you when
I studied it, at least for myself, I found solace, because I lived with the thought that
everything that happens to me is against constitutional human rights and
you yourself have announced such disclosure in a disgraceful context for
people who are not guilty, for unconstitutional. Except affecting mine
honor and good name, I found myself guilty of something I didn't do, up to
no evidence has been presented to date. And the administration,
charged with conducting the elections, did not undertake to trample constitutionally
guaranteed rights and principles. Isn't the CEC obliged to be guided only by
only from the Constitution and the laws of the country, despite the fact that it is a function of
political will? If the Constitution is the supreme law for all of us,
citizens of this country, how is it not for the members of the CEC?

On 15.06. The SAC annulled Decision 330 of the CEC and declared the
decision “X690 of RIK-Razgrad Meanwhile, the SAC with decision 4270 was

also declared invalid the decision 288 of the CEC, which gave the opportunity

the files to be removed from the sheets by the so-called certificates, and with that
and their names were announced, albeit indirectly.

THE DECLARATION BY YOU OF DECISION 90 OF THE REC
DISSOLUTION OF NULL MEANS THAT IN TECHNIK OF THE WHOLE
PRE-ELECTION PERIOD FROM 16.05. UNTIL 17.06. MY REGISTRATION
OF THE CANDIDATE FOR NATIONAL REPRESENTATIVE AS LEADER OF
THE RAZGRAD LIST OF NMSS WAS LEGALLY PERFECT
AND WITHOUT INTERRUPTION.

On the contrary, from a legal point of view, Irena Varadinova was not
registered, WAS NOT VALIDLY REGISTERED FOR A SINGLE DAY
AS A CANDIDATE FOR NATIONAL REPRESENTATIVE.

However, the CEC did not comply with the court's rulings. Ice ev! Diaz's ears
(The court decision is like a legal provision)? The logical conclusion is that its laws
court decisions in our country do not apply to everyone equally. YOU
declared the invalidity of the decision of REC Razgrad, after it was taken in
violation of a constitutional decision, in violation of ZINI, and Decision 288 of
The CEC has already been declared null and void. Moreover, for nullity the court must.
to monitor ex officio - on the one hand, and on the other - I myself have the right to
I appeal, despite the fact that the ZINP has not provided anything special for this one
case. But by virtue of your decisions - X21/95. and the considerations under cd He7 / 95g. -

Article 120, paragraph 2 of the CRB provides an opportunity to appeal the acts of anyone

 

administrative body, unless the law expressly prohibits this, especially
when it comes to the constitutional rights of citizens.

The essential question is how they are from a decision declared null and void
valid legal consequences have arisen, as in practice (such is the one established in
Bulgaria since the existence of administrative law) a null and void decision no
gives rise to the intended legal consequences of its author. Moreover, the question in question
nullity was declared by the Supreme Administrative Court.

Decision 131 of REC Razgrad does not create a new legal situation with regard to
of my registration, it only orders the district governor to print

newsletters with my name on it. The decision confirms my initial registration

from 16.05 this year, but even without it it (my initial registration) is valid.
The annulment of decision 131 of the DEC with decision 345 of the CEC does not concern at all
my initial registration. Decision 28 of 16.05. of RIK-Razgrad in general
not canceled! Whether a valid registration is confirmed one, two or three
times it has no bearing on its validity and it is valid until it is
canceled. Even if CEC Decision 345 was not declared null and void by the SAC
June 19, this year, my registration as a candidate would still be perfect, because
with decision 345 of the CEC, Decision 28 of DEC Razgrad was not attacked at all, but by
on the other hand, decision131 of the DEC does not affect my status as duly registered
candidate, and has a declarative character, in the sense that I am the leader of NMSS and
imperative - by ordering the printing of ballots in my name. For me
of great importance is the fact that on Saturday night by virtue of an appeal (even in
at the moment it does not matter that the petitioner was not legitimate in my case) only
hours before the start of the vote, the CEC may request to cancel one
registration of a candidate for MP! You, DEAR
CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, can you justify such a thing? You think
Is it possible that in our Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Bulgaria a text can be found,
to defend such a situation? The rights of the individual and his
dignity, security and the rule of law, the guarantee of the free development of
human and civil society, equality before the law, the responsibility of
the state ... how are they observed in the described case?

Why a person who is not registered as a candidate for the people at all
representative was announced elected in decision 348 of the CEC? And why I'm not
declared an elected Member of Parliament?

Decision 345 of the CEC was taken at the request of I Kostov, the leader of another.
a political force that has nothing to do with my registration, which is why

it was declared null and void in the part concerning me by YOU.

Why isn't my name on all the ballots?
A sufficient number of ballots with my name were initially printed

at the top of the NMSS list - about 150,000 for Razgrad region and 27,000 for

Europe. After decision 4421 of the Supreme Administrative Court from 15.06. on the same date at its meeting
RIK Razgrad refused to consider my case on the grounds that they did not have the decision, despite
that I personally told him on the phone after taking it, and later to them
I faxed. Meanwhile, the CEC sent them a letter telling them that
the SAC's decision had not entered into force because they intended to
appealed and ordered them not to comply with it. And without even having it
formal meeting of the CEC and have voted for such a decision! The President of
RIK Razgrad V. Nanev personally called me on the evening of June 15, that it was necessary
to send them the original stamped decision of the SAC by the next day 8:00
in the morning. In the evening I sent the decision by courier. On June 19, this year, Saturday
in the morning, RIK Razgrad meets from 8:00 am and sets a new condition - the decision
of the SAC to be notarized and submitted in triplicate. Oh that
I did, despite my bewilderment, that the original copy with the solution of
YOU (charged, certified, with wet seals) may arouse suspicion of infidelity
and how so when I notarize it, it becomes perfect ?! At 9:50 RIK Razgrad
decides 131 - to print ballots with my name and announces it publicly in
the municipal building. Immediately our associates at the headquarters of NMSS Razgrad
contact the regional governor Neycho Georgiev to find the ballots with
my name. They are told that the ballots are missing. The district governor
flatly refuses to print new ballots with my name and delivers them to the DEC
Razgrad ballots with the name of Irena Varadinova at the top of the NMSS list, which
it was not registered at all after the annulment of decision 90 of REC Razgrad. I
I wrote a letter to RIK - Razgrad that they should only hand out ballots with my name on them.
In the afternoon, the distribution of ballots to representatives of
section commissions. RIK Razgrad no longer had any of its members. But
in front of the room is placed in a prominent place Decision 131, which states that
NMSS participates in the elections with its initial registration, ie. with leaf guide
Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov. However, ballots with a different name are distributed.
It is beyond my power to influence this process. Obviously, after
as there is no legal norm according to which I can intervene in

the printing and distribution of ballots, at least I am responsible and

I should bear the negative consequences of non - compliance with the decisions of
the court by the authorized civil servants and institutions.

On the other hand, sufficient numbers have been sent to Europe in advance
newsletters with my name on it. But on 15.06 this year (exactly when the SAC overturned the decision of
CEC and the respective DEC for cancellation of my registration! And at noon
all media spread this news) Ministry of Foreign Affairs
sends an express letter to the diplomatic missions and consular posts in
those countries by which it notifies them that my name has been deleted from the NMSS list and
to vote with the ballots of Irena Varadinova and only if they do not reach or
they have not sent any newsletters with my name on them.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs did nothing on June 15 this year either. nor on 16.06. to notify
representations for the new situation created by Decision 4421 of the SAC ir.131
of RIK Razgrad. At least there were enough newsletters available, one of which was yours
attach. It is not clear what ballots were used to vote - my name or that of
Irena Varadinova.

Immediately after the decision of the Supreme Administrative Court, the CEC spokeswoman, Mrs. Negentsova
made an official statement, quoted in the media, that it didn't matter with what.
the ballot is voted. "The electoral system is proportional and there is no name
meaning, the rest will be decided later. "

These are the facts. It is clear that if on 15.06. this year or even the next day,
first, the regional governor Peycho Georgiev had fulfilled his obligations
and had delivered the printed ballots in my name to the Razgrad REC, not them
he had hidden or destroyed, or had ordered new ones to be printed
such, and secondly, if Stoyan Todorov from the departmental commission for the elections at
The Ministry of Interior had sent an expert letter to the DP and CP of the Republic of Bulgaria in Europe that I
I am the legitimate candidate, there would be no dispute about mine
election and perhaps the CEC itself would not take Decision 345 at 7:30 p.m.
before the election. The above-mentioned two persons have grossly violated its laws
the decision of the SAC and RIK Razgrad as they prevented my election as a people's representative
representative. Gova is a criminal offense under Art. 167, 1996 and 169c of Art

Penal Code, which is punishable by up to five years in prison. Precisely because of

this crime, however, I am not declared elected, but another person, How then
a crime consumes favorable consequences for offenders, and
for the victim to keep the negatives? From Roman law to the present day in all
legal systems is based on the principle that no one can take advantage of one
crime to reap the benefits. How in Bulgaria, for which the National Assembly is
the most important body of power by virtue of Art. 1, para of the Constitution can be
broadcast illegitimate representatives with the help of other, again state bodies?
When it becomes clear that this is possible, the logical question is “How
so the district governors can (and the court cannot) decide who they are
legitimate candidates and the CEC to provide them with the relevant certificates for
chosen? ”

As the case has received a great deal of attention in the mass media,
to all voters in Razgrad on Friday and Saturday before the elections
it became clear that the leader of the movement's list was Ventseslav Dimitrov. Convinced
I think that with my actions, meetings and messages to the voters during
the whole campaign (except the last 5 days) I am the person with whom
the voter in Razgrad made contact and to whom he gave his trust.

A candidate for MP cannot run for office
the voter and win their vote in 5 days. Especially considering that
Irena Varadinova herself was notified of the lawsuits and awaited them
exit. My doubts are that there was an unspoken agreement between
the representatives of the state in the person of the regional governor P Georgiev, CEC,
Ministry of Interior and REC Razgrad for spoiling the elections as even before the decision
345 of the CEC, taken at 7.30 pm on 16.06 this year, to distribute ballots with the name of a person,
unregistered as a candidate. Otherwise so many coincidences would not coincide.
However, this is a conspiracy against the rule of law, against the state itself and in practice
succeeded in announcing Irena Varadinova as elected MP
instead of Ventseslav Dimitrov.

And it now depends on the Constitutional Court whether it will legalize the results of this conspiracy. It touches
for illegal actions of state bodies not only against me as a candidate

for a Member of Parliament, but also against the judiciary and the rule of law.

Resolving this dispute is important to me, but its nature is not private

legal, and public law. The CEC demonstrates to everyone that everything it has

to happen is AB oshi ogshagit (pre-decided) and whatever actions

to do whatever the court decides will be as the CEC decides
DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The attitude towards me from the administration building during the elections
it was absolutely inexplicable. First, because there is no legal norm in force
to whom an administrative body should be placed above the court and above the law, secondly,
because such unjustified actions are literally reminiscent of politics
repression, and thirdly, because THIS CAN HAPPEN TO EVERYONE, if with something
don't like it.

I turn to each of you because the institution that
you represent builds your image and authority thanks to the qualities of
each of you individually, in this sense you yourself, especially from the present
the position you have, you would be even more polarized than the Bulgarian one
society at your next professional appearances. The situation in which I myself
I fell out, unfortunately it can be explained not by legal provisions, but by
categories outside the law. And this is the absurdity when a state institution, from
the strength of its positions of power can afford to pursue a policy based on,
who he likes and who he doesn't. My hope is that you will thwart everyone's intentions
an administrative body to place its personal antipathies higher than the duty to
observes the laws and the established order in the country. Once the Constitution gives us
the right to freely choose our professions, to express an opinion and to defend
positions, no one has the right to sanction us for this if we have not committed a crime
allowed.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

I will summarize what has been said so far in the words of Prof. Georg Jelinek: “The activity of
state bodies are in fact state activity itself. .. „in any legal norm
there is a guarantee for the subordinates that while it is acting, it does NOT bind itself
State (“General Doctrine of the State”, Sofia-R, Sofia 1993, pp.390-391) C

the foreword to the cited work Prof. St. Balamezov points out that “the state is

limited by the law which it itself creates, and its activity is
subject to this right. "And that it is impossible" to assume that the state is not
bound by the law which it itself establishes ”(ibid., p. 3) If this
It is really so, do we have a state or not? The Dossier Commission,
Are the CEC, the REC, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the regional governor part of our country?
or not?

Without a doubt for everyone in our society solving
the present dispute is relevant because it will either give the key to the implementation of
rules according to personal attitude, or will confirm one endured for years
principle - OF STATEHOOD.

The non-observed decision of the SAC in my case gave rise to other cases
(I mean> the revoked license of Nova TV) to be questioned
The "correctness and legality" of the judgments of the Supreme Administrative
court. If in our society it is possible the bodies to which the judiciary belongs
decisions to assess their convenience, correctness, etc., then for what legal order
are we talking No administrative body, nor any person,
affected by a judgment, to afford the discretion of the Court! Have you thought about it
you are what would happen if someone refuses to fulfill yours - the Constitutional
court decision? In the case of my candidate, my registration as a CEC directly said:
"The decision of the Supreme Administrative Court does not matter to us, the dispute will be resolved by the Constituent Assembly
court ”. If tomorrow someone thinks that in his opinion the decision of the Constitutional Court does not matter,
let the dispute be settled in, say, the European Court of Justice. You, how will you defend its status
the authority of the court? Are the authorities then divided or the executive can

is he mocking the court?

Conspiracy between the Dossier Commission and the CEC
The plot outlined above arose earlier when persons involved in
CEC, etc. The Dossiers Committee agreed to adopt Decision 288 of the
05.06.2001 of the CEC, which gives the right to the Dossier Commission to issue and
so called certificates for "agency past", except for the Report, which is provided in

ЗДДБСБРУГЩ. This part of CEC Decision 288 was declared null and void

Decision 4270 of the SAC. It is interesting to note, however, that the issuance of
the certificates start even before the CEC has ruled on Decision 288.
For example, NMSS was issued a certificate 013 from 04.06.2001 (in my case)
Who ordered the CEC and the Dossier Commission to do such things? Those are all
they are still part of the executive branch in that country and if they do not work according to
The constitution and the laws, and against them, mean working against the foundations of itself
country. CEC with Decision 288 of 05.06 this year gave "right" to the Dossier Commission
to issue to the parties and coalitions a new document, not described in the respective law -
so called certificates for registered persons. It is on the basis of these certificates
The DECs also canceled the registration. (However, REC Varna refused
to comply with these "documents" due to their unconstitutionality). More
late after decision 4270 of the SAC of 12.06 this year, during the cases in the SAC
the CEC representatives supported a completely different thesis - that it did not matter how
the parties and coalitions have got acquainted with the list of the registered, ie. that
the document (the proof!) is not important, but the judgment that the parties themselves are
did. (But Article 48, paragraph 5 of the ZINP speaks of data!). It is the CEC, again on the occasion
of art. 48 of ZINP, with regard to the circumstances in para 4, with r.280 from 01.06-t.g.
requires explicit medical or other identification documents in case of replacement
of one candidate with another (ie evidence!). With the very presentation of
the certificates under art. 48, para 5 of ZINP in the part outside the Report of the Commission on
the files are made public, which is rude
violation of their rights, of the Constitution and of Decision of the Constitutional Court 10 of 22
September 1997. It is indeed a public announcement because there is no other
possibility for deregistration of the respective candidates. That it existed
an agreement between members of the two commissions - on the files and the CEC, is also evident in
the statements made by some of their representatives to the media. And here
it is a gross violation of the political rights of candidates, which
is also an offense under the Penal Code. The impudence of the CEC representatives during
proceedings before the Supreme Administrative Court - V. Georgiev, I. Rizova and R. Negentsova, went so far as to
their direct allegations during the meetings before the SAC they claimed that

the candidates for MPs had no legal interest in appealing to

deregistration, do not have their own political rights, that they are “with an agency
past ”and“ disputable morality ”. It is no coincidence that the CEC decided 288
on 05.06. this year, in order to justify already issued illegally certificates, but also for
to prevent possible appeals before the SAC precisely because of the lack of
enough time until election day. For the same reason, the Commission on
the files were not issued legally, etc. certificates at the beginning of the campaign or
before her. As you can see, there are too many coincidences to be accidental. Here
why I think it is a premeditated conspiracy
against the Constitution and the rule of law by influential representatives of
the targeted state institutions.
DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

I would like to draw your attention to the following facts:

1. Chapter five of the ZINP is entitled “Candidates for Members of Parliament” and not
"Political parties and coalitions", i.e. at the center of the relationship that
arise on the occasion of the election campaign is placed precisely the candidate, 4
not the party, resp. coalition Logically, this statement was taken from
the constitutionally established provisions under which the right to passive
a vote with an important political right of the citizens (not of the parties) and not of the parties and
formations, and CITIZENS are the expressions of political will.
Political formations only “contribute to the formation and expression of
the political will of the citizens ”- Art., para 3 of the CRB By virtue of
The Constitution and the ZINP the candidate (not the political force) with the holder of
a number of rights - recognition of the status of an official, the right to register
advocates, to have immunity and to be elected. The current ZINP defends
powers of the candidates for Members of Parliament after the registration of
the candidate lists with the restrictions set for the parties and coalitions by
the ZINP itself (certain conditions and terms are set). Here is an example: B
Article 48, paragraph 4 of the Law on Public Procurement provides for the possibility when a candidate “dies or
fall into a permanent inability to participate in the elections, the party or the coalition
may propose a new candidate. " In this case, as I mentioned above, s

decision 280 / 1.6.2001 The CEC requires these facts to be proved before the DEC because

it is not enough just an application from the candidate, but it is necessary to be
submitted "relevant medical certificates or other documents".
(I also attach p.280 of the CEC). The cited decision 280 of the CEC comes to show that it does not
deregistration may be indiscriminately performed during the campaign and
there must be evidence of the event or condition for it to be valid
legal consequences of it. And what is the yardstick with which the CEC measured in
the next hypothesis - of Article 48, paragraph 5 of the LESD? What is the proof?
presented that I have collaborated with the former DS? I dwell in detail below
on the fax with which this was done, but here I will only inform you that on the case
a prosecutor's inspection has already been ordered with a letter from Heb451 / 19.07.2001, a copy of which
attach.

2. In the course of the court proceedings before the SAC, the representatives of the CEC
objected that the REC should also be constituted as a party to the cases,
Razgrad. By virtue of the established legal situation, these two bodies are
find in a relationship of bound competence. The DECs are being implemented and are being implemented
obey all decisions and follow the instructions of the CEC. What country can
to be the REC then and whose interest will it be? Not to mention that when
As for the declaration of nullity, the court may do so ex officio without

there is a case. And my legal interest is so obvious that it cannot be proved.

What determines the choice - the list or the ballot?

Decision X1 of the Constitutional Court of 1994 treats a similar case, but under the old law on
election of members of parliament. It is about a person, not registered iv
the list and in the ballot, for a person who did not have the qualities of a candidate for the People's Party
representative throughout the campaign from listing to election.

Naturally, the most logical thing is to have compliance and full coverage
between the registered candidate list and the names and arrangement of
the candidates in the ballot. In the case in question, there is a discrepancy between
the candidate list registered in RIK Razgrad and the ballots distributed to
NMSS. Article 74, paragraph 2 of the ZINP states that they are noted in the bulletin

"... the names of the persons on the candidate list" Obviously in the handed out

NMSS bulletins from REC Razgrad and partly in Europe the names of the persons
entered in the ballot do not correspond to the person on the candidate list. IN
Article 80, paragraph 1 indicates that the ballots are received by the section commissions “before
election day ”, i.e. on Saturday 16.06. (The date is important because Decision 131 of the REC North
full force on that day and it was only legal to hand out ballots in my name
as the leader of the NMSS list.) But on the contrary, all PECs are
received from REC Razgrad on that day wrong bulletins of NMSS regarding
of the leader of the list as the name of Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov intentionally and
It was maliciously replaced by the name of Irena Varadinova.

Val. 97, para 3, item 2 of ZINP it is said that her vote is recognized as valid
when “there are deviations in the ballots due to defects and errors in
production. ” And in the same article, but in para 4 it is said that “an envelope that does not contain
ballots according to the established pattern ... corresponds to one invalid vote, ”
The question here is whether the ballots in which
deliberately by the state bodies in charge of conducting the election have placed
another person who does not have the qualities of a candidate for MP in the position
of this candidate who has a perfect, confirmed by the SAC registration?

There are no other explanations in the ZINP. (In the old law in art. 77, para 2 extremely clear
it is said that in case of discrepancy in the ballot and the list, the vote is considered
valid and “counted as submitted for the respective list in the area” In the new one
However, there is no such definite text in the law) However, in the new ZINP
implies that an official document of fact is
the duly registered candidate list, not the ballot. Which of the above two
hypotheses is applicable to the case at hand? Maybe the first because in
in fact, all ballots have already been recognized for
actual votes for NMSS. If the Constitutional Court accepts the second hypothesis as valid, this
means that the elections in 18 MIR Razgrad are flawed because the votes for NMSS
should be declared invalid. ZINP does not provide another opportunity. But
if the first hypothesis is accepted, it will mean that it is elected popular
representative will be Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov, and the choice of Yrena

Varadinova should not be recognized. It is even more illogical if it is announced

another that is in another, later place in the leaves because it remains. the question of whom
does he replace? If Irena Varadinova is illegally declared a national
representative, it is because she did not have the qualities of a candidate for the People's Party
representative. And I, DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, have I lost
In your opinion, your qualities as a candidate for MP? My place in
the list as a leader, by virtue of court decisions has not changed. And here it is
the essence of the dispute you have to resolve - WHAT IS LEGAL
POSITION.

It is obvious that the CC should seek answers to the following questions:

What if by negligence or negligence printed and distributed
the bulletin does not correspond to the registered list? The candidate in the list who is
missed in the ballot, will it be considered elected or not?

And what if maliciously by government agencies patronized with
the organization and conduct of elections, one candidate registered
regularly in the list, be replaced by another, with irregular registration? Can I
the first to be considered unelected and the second to be elected. Should it be flawed
the election and re-run or just a decision of the Constitutional Court in the case is sufficient, of course
proper referral? This is exactly the case at hand.

Can the one replaced in the ballot, but regularly registered in the list
candidate, to bear the negative consequences of malicious and illegal
actions of the executive branch, which does not comply with a series
decisions of YOU?

In addition to non-compliance with decisions of the SAC, the state authorities charged with
conduct the elections - CEC, DEC, district manager and Ministry of Interior, village
the deliberate compilation and distribution of the bulletin in accordance with
the leaves apparently committed a serious crime not only against
the unregistered candidate for MP, but also against the political ones
rights of all voters from 18 MIR Razgrad. More illegal
in this way they are prevented from exercising their right to vote freely.
(Consumed crimes under Articles 167, 1696 and 169c of the Penal Code). That's right

the ballot serves the particular voter to make his decision, to determine

his will and realize it with his vote. But what can a voter do,
when he does not see the name of the one who campaigned for one party or
coalition and is normally registered as a candidate?

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

It is on this issue that I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Republic
Bulgaria is a party to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
fundamental freedoms, ratified by the National Assembly on September 7, 1992. Protected under this
Convention on the Rights of Citizens includes the right to free elections - Article 3
of Protocol 1. This Convention forms part of our domestic law. This means that
under this article for their unprotected rights in our country not only 23 and some of my colleagues, but also
all voters from the 18th MIR Razgrad and Europe can seek protection in
European Court of Human Rights. Moreover, there is already such a precedent -
Matthews v. Britain, in which Britain was sentenced to
pay the applicant the sum of £ 45,000. Apart from that, there is also
precedent of a convicted state for non-compliance with a decision of the Supreme
administrative court - the case of Hornsby v. Greece, in which he participated as a judge
and one of you - Judge Dimitar Gochev.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

I want to assure you that as a longtime MP, as a member of
the official delegation at the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria to the Council of Europe, when
this Convention was signed as a member of the Joint Parliamentary
Committee Bulgaria-European Union during the 37th and 38th National Assembly, I have a hot
desire that the internal Bulgarian problems can be solved by ours
institutions. That is why I turn to the last resort in my case -
The Constitutional Court. But since I have always fought to protect the rights of
citizens in our country, and for the construction of a true rule of law in our country
European model, I declare to you that I will not hesitate in your negative for
me a decision on the case in question, in the name and to protect precisely this legal
country, I will turn to the European Court of Human Rights for justice.
Hopefully, however, this will not be done by the thousands of voters from the 18th MIR Razgrad and

Europe, because the financial burden on the country will be unbearable.

My relations are NMSS

From the very beginning I started an active campaign in 18 MIR Razgrad since
among all the candidates for MPs in the movement I have
greatest experience - I have successfully participated in 4 campaigns before
members of parliament. Without any structures with my fellow candidates quickly
we managed to create clubs in all municipalities and mobilize activists,
which is crucial for a campaign.

At 8.06, ie just a week before the end of the campaign we were with colleagues at
tour in the village of Tetovo at noon from journalists on the phone I learned about the receipt
NMSS,

signed by V. Draganova and T. Peykov. You can imagine how surprised

  

request to cancel my registration on request.

I have been, since so far no hint has been made by the movement
to me for something like that. NMSS did not inform me that it intended to withdraw
my candidacy, even less because of my past as an agent. I later realized
that NMSS had the list of those registered at the beginning of
the campaign! This, DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, is inexplicable to

everyone familiar with the legal norms and procedures. First, because the publicity

 

the names of the files contradicts your constitutional decision,

 

secondly, because at the beginning of the campaign the decision in question 288 of the CEC
did not exist and in this sense there was no legal basis to
export and hold similar data. Not without significance is the fact that
the additional data that Tosho Peykov presents to RIK-Razgrad in order to
verify my agency history, are sent by fax to which the signatures of
The dossier commission is dated 04.06.2001 (with registration X013), and decision 288 of the CEC

was taken a day later. Where did the legal basis for this come from?

  

something? Finally, I will only remind you that CEC Decision 288 itself was promulgated
for null and void in this part of the SAC with decision 4270.

The natural conclusion to be drawn here is that NMSS had a list of
names of files filed much earlier than possible (how did this happen, obviously
is not the subject of the present case). For me as a candidate of NMSS, as a leader of

list is unacceptable, if they had my name, to qualify me

of an associate and therefore to withdraw me, but notice when - in the last possible
deadline for replacement of candidates. This is done or in order to use these
candidates until the last possible deadline to campaign for NMSS or with
in order for those same people not to be able to appeal against the decision to annul
registrations in the normal order.

Immediately after learning the request of NMSS to cancel my registration
I contacted the office of the leader of the movement Simeon II and asked
emergency meeting. It took place on the evening of the same date. I explained to him that it was
unconstitutionally and unlawfully to invoke the fact of
filing as evidence of cooperation or agency background, but I did not meet
counter-desire to correct the decision of NMSS. Still, he showed up
understanding of my intention to seek my rights to the end because it is affected
my good name in society. Later after the annulment of
Decision 288 of the CEC I sent a fax to Simeon II with a recommendation to withdraw
applications for cancellation of the registration of the registered, however again without
result. After the decisions of the SAC, it seems that the leader of NMSS has understood the mistake
of the movement, but did nothing to correct it,

The fax in question to RIK Razgrad has already become available to the media. I reached out
Prosecutor General's Office to establish whether a documentary crime has been committed
against an official (such as the candidate for MP). Many of
the attributes of this fax say just that. At first it consists of only 2
separate pages, the first of which concerns a completely different person -
Ventsislav Davidkov, featured in the report. On the second page is my name,
apparently pushed further and copied on a copier. Then
the signatures of 6 members of the Commission are visible. Two of them - E Dimitrov and M. Redzheb
however, they stated that such a document had not been issued and signed by them. However, it is clear
that some document has been issued to NMSS. After the date it says that the document is
issued in | copy and consists of one sheet. But the second sheet was faxed
separately. The document is therefore dissected, then forged with an insert
my name and finally sent by fax to RIK Razgrad. There are now three copies

and at the same time inauthentic! In REC Razgrad the document is shown to the members for

short time as a secret and the members were left with the impression that
the first page is about my "agency past." This is how it is announced
to all interested and spread by all mass media that I am
filed and therefore removed from the NMSS list. It is this way because
7 days before election day there is no other legal possibility to be removed from
leaves. Thus, the Decision of the Constitutional Court He10 / 97 was violated. Interestingly, the number of
the sending device is also forged - it is 3592 9814411. This is the number of
Center for mental and physical disabilities, where they claim they do not deal
with similar things and have never sent such a fax for which they have
confirmation from the post office. According to the chairman of REC Razgrad
the document was sent by fax from Tosho Peykov, who had submitted it earlier
the same day the application. These are the facts. This also applies to consumption
a crime under Chapter 9 as well as under Art. 167, 1696 and 169 of the Penal Code.

Naturally, the persons T. Peykov and V. Draganova were not fascinated by the fact
that the apparently forged document sent by them came to light. Yes
that they, insofar as they have important functions in the NMSS, and perhaps other persons who are
assisted them in carrying out this task, are interested in my removal
from NMSS at any cost. On the other hand, many people in NMSS already realize that
actions against me are actions against court decisions, against the law and
The Constitution, so maybe even now they prefer not to take anything
attitude. It is normal to assume that there are people inside the movement who are
they are afraid of my presence in the National Assembly and that their actions will be focused on this one
direction.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

All my complaints, letters, objections and requests to RIK Razgrad, CEC, SAC and
now to the Constitutional Court in connection with the protection of my rights are
dictated not so much by my desire to necessarily be declared a people
representative. I've been like this long enough to think it's me
the only vocation in life. The problem is that while I was a candidate for the people
representative of NMSS and I actively participated in the election campaign of this

coalition through illegal and illegal actions by state

authorities (Dossier Commission and CEC) as well as from NMSS, I was
unjustly, unlawfully and unconstitutionally defamed, by
all the media I was declared a whistleblower, an agent of the State Security, with an agent's past,
"Reporter", collaborator, etc. without having a real legal opportunity
adequately defend against defamation. Ordinary people do not make a difference
between proven collaborators and registered, for them the hints in the media are
sufficient for the stigmatization of man and for his political, and which is more
important - social marginalization. Hence my unwavering will
to defend my place in the lists as an elected MP, which will be
the first step in the direction of my defense. I'm just interested in how to
defend my name, honor and dignity, to which I am entitled under the Constitution
(art. 32, para 1), because this concerns not only me personally, my authoritarian and my future
life, but also that of my family members, my relatives, my relatives and
known for years to come. For this purpose, I count on your positive
decision, knowing full well that the law is on my side.

I am well aware that this whole exhibition would be
superfluous if in our country there was a body that could
made a state institution - the Central Electoral
commission to implement an effective decision of the Supreme
administrative court and declare me elected people's
representative. I hope that the Constitutional Court is this body.

Attach:

1. Decision of the CEC He280 ​​of 01.06.2001

2. Letter from the Supreme Cassation Prosecutor's Office.

3. Interview of G. Tokin with KN Nakarov from "Trud" newspaper.
4

Copy of Certificate 013 from 04.05 this year of the Dossier Commission. <<
Opinion of Judge Hristo Danov I consider that § 6 of the LSA contradicts the Constitution for the following reasons. According to Article 19, paragraph 1 of the Constitution the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria is based on free economic initiative. Paragraph 2 of the same text explicitly provides that the law guarantees equal rights and conditions for economic activity of all citizens and legal entities. Article 20a of the CPA stipulates that the contract concluded between two parties is a law for them. The state acts as an equal and equal partner with regard to the properties representing private state property. in the legal relationship in which she is a party. It follows that she in this capacity, entering into a certain legal relationship that binds her to a force equivalent to the law, can not unilaterally change the conditions under which they were formed. a contract, which is concluded for a definite term or is indefinite, contains planned actions, which are determined both by the term for which this contract p is concluded both for the purposes pursued by it. This means that it is not possible to request the termination of a contract of significant duration, which provides for investments involving huge costs. Termination of such a contract will be an unbearable burden both for the one who has made investments and for the state, if it will have to pay them. Such cases can be mentioned and this will be particularly contrary to Article 19, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. It should be borne in mind that many foreign investments have been made by establishing the right of use due to the explicit prohibition of Article 22, para 1 of the Constitution. Such investments made on the basis of long-term use contracts cannot be withdrawn and such withdrawal would be particularly contrary to the rule of law and investment protection. The considerations that the law provided for the establishment of a limited real right of use for a period of ten years and this required to equalize the rights of the state in relation to its real estate and, on the other hand, also the rights of citizens, does not tolerate any criticism.The law has effect for the future and therefore anyone who wants to enter into such legal relations and to establish in his favor the right of use, will know in the first place for how long he will be able to dispose of the property, whether it will have economic benefits for him and hence what investments he can afford to make. In short, he will know what the economic benefits of such a deal are. The confiscation of the property - the shortening of the term unilaterally - discredits the interests of the counterparty, who has trusted the law and order that existed at the time of the legal relationship. It will be placed in a very unfavorable position, which is inadmissible and which is obviously in significant contradiction with the provision of Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, as in practice the principle of the rule of law will be refuted in this case. The reference to the provision of Article 14 of the LNA on the possibility of creating legal norms with retroactive effect in this case is not justified by any of the considerations of the draft decision provided in the case. In its Decision № 17 of 1999 the Constitutional Court adopted in its reasons (ROX 1999, p. 186) the following: “… The principle of the rule of law contained in (Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution), among other things, means that the foundations of the rule of law laid down in The Constitution, apply equally to the bodies of the legislative, executive and judicial power, as well as to all other legal entities… ”In the same sense is Decision № 22 of 1996 (ROX 1996, p.230) and on the contrary argument Decision № 19 of 1993. The confiscation of the property by virtue of the provision of § 6 of the LSA does not provide for any compensation for shortening the term of use, payment of damages due to unilateral denunciation and termination of the contract and the value of improvements made in the property, nor is it indicated in what capacity and on what grounds they can be claimed. I cannot agree with the considerations made in the draft decision that such compensations were intended to be paid. In this case it is not a question of expropriation of the property, as discussed in the proposal made. Such expropriation could be done, but only within the framework of a law giving rights to it. The revocation of a created right through its unilateral termination cannot find any point of contact with the expropriation of property, especially since the property belongs to the state. In this case, she cannot alienate anything that belongs to her at all. In this case, the expropriation of properties for public needs is permissible only when this will be done for an event designated to create real estate public property. In this case, a right is taken away, which becomes unilateral and this, in my opinion, is inadmissible to happen. That is why I believe that the text of § ZDS is unconstitutional and should be declared as such.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Margarita Zlatareva The author of this statement does not share the conclusion in the decision under c.d. № 1/2001 on the unconstitutionality of the provision of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act (FRAA). The provision of § 6 of the FRAA reduces the term for exercising the limited real right of use on state property established before its entry in force for more than 10 years, up to 10 years according to the basic provision for this right under art. 56, para 1 of the LSA. The provision was created with the State Property Act itself, promulgated, SG, issue 22 of 21.05.1996 and aims to rearrange all cases found by it, which are not in sync with the rule of art. 56, para. 1 of the LDA, that the limited real right of use may be established on state property for a maximum of 10 years. According to Art. 17, para 4 of the Constitution, the regime of the objects of state and municipal property is determined by law, which means that the legislator is empowered by the Constitution to regulate the right of ownership for these objects in a way different from the general legal regime of property in general. The constitutional provision applies to both public state property and private state property. Therefore, the rule that the limited real right of use, which is indisputably a derivative of the right of ownership and defensible like it, can be established for a maximum of 10 years on state property, is in line with the Constitution. gives retroactive force to the norm, what is the effect and the meaning of the discussed § 6 of the Law on the Protection of Constitutional Rights and the consequences of whether they reflect on constitutionally guaranteed rights to the extent that the norm is declared unconstitutional. acts, promulgated, SG, issue 27/73, amended, issue 65/95, allows retroactive effect of a normative act by exception, when this is explicitly stated (without the norms, which provide for sanctions), and The Constitutional Court has further developed the rule by specifying in Decision /1 9/1996 that the principle of non-retroactivity of penal norms should also be extended to tax norms. It follows that the possibility by law to give retroactive effect to a substantive rule is not excluded. However, if this retroactive effect affects already acquired rights, it should be considered whether their defensibility competes with other constitutionally guaranteed principles or rights. The right to property as an absolute real right may be limited when a higher interest, such as the state interest, cannot be satisfied in another way, and under certain conditions - Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. According to the argumentum a contrario, the limited right of use should also be able to be limited in the name of the public interest. In this case the hypothesis of expropriation for state need under Art. more than this period. The return of the paid for the time during which this right will not be exercised should be considered as the due compensation for it. The substantiation of the state need, due to which it is necessary to reduce the term of exercising the acquired limited real right to use state property in Adoption of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the Law on State Property has not been made, but MPs have adopted the reasons for adopting the analogous § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the Municipal Property Act - Express transcript 70.3 of 169 sitting of 8.05.1996. of the XXXLII National Assembly. And there the consideration was to equalize the regime of the existing cases, among which there is a gratuitous and indefinite established right of use on state and municipal property, with the regime of future hypotheses, limiting the establishment of this limited real right to 10 years. of the legislator for the adoption of the provision of § 6 of the CRPD, the author of this statement considers that the need to eliminate cases of unjust enrichment of contracts concluded under clearly unfavorable conditions for the state as owner is the higher interest that requires reverse action of the substantive law. The public good is preferred to the protection of private property; the collective interest, understanding the state interest, has prevailed over the private, individual interest. There is the principle of the so-called legal justice. It should also be noted that the second sentence of § 6 of the RZDPZ, allowing the termination of the limited real right within 6 months, when the 10-year period of use has expired at the time of entry of the law in force, means contracts concluded 10 years before the entry into force of the State Property Act. This means that these are legal relations that arose during the operation of the Constitution of 1971, when state property was not divided into public and private, and when there was a constitutional obligation of the so-called national (state) property to be ceded to gratuitous use of cooperatives, public organizations and citizens - Article 17 of the Constitution of 1971. The radically different regime of types of property, introduced by the Constitution of 1991, requires a reorganization of relations related to state property in accordance with the current Constitution , as the provision of § 3, para 1 and 2 of the transitional and final provisions of the Constitution sets requirements for the existing laws. Uncertainty in the legal order, against which the principle of the rule of law, proclaimed in art. 4, para 1 of The Constitution may be considered from a different point of view than the one indicated in the decision. The provision under discussion entered into force on 24.05.1996; most of the existing legal relations have been rearranged, and the users of objects - state property - in other legal relations have the legal expectations during this 5-year period for termination of their right of use. With the declaration of § 6 of the RZDZSS as unconstitutional now, after 5 years the legal uncertainty deepens. Therefore, raising the expediency in this case in a constitutional consideration related to legal justice, the author of the statement considers that the predominance and protection of the collective interest creates the necessary balance between the two groups of persons with affected rights. an action that affects acquired rights is unconstitutional. Constitutional justice considers contract cases in which the difference in public relations regulated by the relevant legal provision is reflected in the conclusions about its compliance with the Constitution. In view of the above, the author of the opinion accepts that the provision of § 6
Dissenting opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov I have signed the decision under c.d. № 1/2001 with a special opinion, because I consider that the provision of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act (TFP ZDS) is not unconstitutional due to the following considerations: 1. The current legal system in Bulgaria does not know different concepts of property rights. One regulated at the level of law (traditional in the Property Act, and intellectual property rights - in the Copyright and Related Rights Act, the Patents Act, the Trademarks and Industrial Designs Act). The other, regulated at the level of the Constitution, which has a broader meaning, covering other property rights, including receivables. The provisions of the Constitution, which deal with the right to property and specifically Article 17, do not redefine this real right, do not include content in it, different from the accepted and established in the current objective law in the country, ie established by law. According to this constitutional provision, the right to property is guaranteed and protected by law. Private property has been declared inviolable. Guarantee and protection are proclaimed, referring to law. The reference to the right to inherit along with the right to property means that a guarantee and protection are also provided to the right to inherit, also referring to law. The constitutional provision of Article 17, paragraph 1 treats both rights in the same way in terms of being guaranteed and protected by law, but not in terms of their content or the legal means for their protection. It is provided for settlement by law. The wording of the provision does not define a broader content of the right of ownership. It does not give grounds to assume that it includes all property rights, therefore even the bond rights, which would erase a significant difference between property and bond rights. The constitutional legislator did not have such a will to turn it into a constitutional provision . From the transcripts of the one hundred and fiftieth sitting of the Grand National Assembly of 12 June 1991 it is established that upon the adoption of Article 17 of the Constitution no new content of the right of ownership was proposed or discussed other than that established by the laws of the country. Such a question did not exist at all for the constitutional legislator. On the contrary - it is clarified that the protection of property proclaimed in Art. 17, para 1 of the Constitution is also protection of intellectual property, which must find its further specification and development in the law. Insertion in the constitutional provision of a broader meaning of the law of property has no support in the wording of the provisions of the Basic Law and contradicts the will of the constitutional legislator. It cannot be motivated by unconstitutional considerations. Rather, they would be an expression of views on a possible future change in the constitutional framework. The Basic Law can and should be applied as it is. The provision of Article 17 of the Constitution treats the right to property, which is regulated by the laws of the country. This constitutional provision is not applicable to other property rights not specified in it. Their owners do not have the protection and inviolability inherent only in property rights. The opposite understanding leads to an unconstitutional result, because instead of a guarantee and enhanced protection of his right, the owner will be in a more unfavorable position than the one constitutionally proclaimed for him.2. Paragraph 6 of the TFR Act implements the rule-making power of the National Assembly regarding the regime of state property, constitutionally recognized by Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution (Decision № 10 of 1996 under Code of Civil Procedure № 8 of 1996). .). Reduction of the term for which the right of use on private state property has been established is a consequence of the radical change of the economic system of Bulgaria - from a centralized planning, based on free economic initiative (Article 19, paragraph 1 of the Constitution). This is inevitably accompanied by a change in the legal framework of property rights. This change is also carried out through the adoption of the Law on State Property, which imposes a new regulation on the limited real right to use private state property, specifically with regard to the term for which it can be established. The previous Constitution of 1971 allowed gratuitous and indefinite assignment of the use of state property and thus a part of the existing legal relations to which § 6 of the TFR of the LSA arose. In a market economy, private state property must also be rationally used in accordance with dynamically changing economic conditions, which requires legislative change. Through it, all users of private state property are placed under equal legal conditions for economic activity - both those who have acquired the right of use before and those who acquired it after the adoption of the Law on State Property. This legal decision fully complies with Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law.3. In principle, the Constitution does not exclude the right of the National Assembly to adopt norms retroactively. Such an exception is explicitly provided for in Article 5, paragraph 3 of the Constitution on criminal liability, but there is obviously no general prohibition on other cases (Decision № 18 of 1997 under Code of Criminal Procedure № 12 of 1997). in the field of substantive civil law, the adoption of a retroactive law, although a rare and in principle undesirable phenomenon because it is related to surprise, is not something unique (Decision № 9 of 1992 under Code of Civil Procedure № 4 of 1992). ). The reverse effect of the disputed provision of § 6 TFP ZDS does not violate the Constitution or the principle of the rule of law.4. As a continuation of the stated in item 1 of this special opinion on the constitutional regulation of the right of property it should be pointed out that para 5 of art. 17 of the basic law has no application and due to the fact that in this case there is no expropriation, ie. . change of ownership, and termination of the legal relationship by reducing the period during which it may exist. If damages have arisen as a result, their reparation will be obtained through the compensations provided for in the applicable civil law. They do not need to be repeated in the contested provision in order to be enforced by a judicial authority.
Dissenting opinion of Judges Vasil Gotsev and Zhivan Belchev We believe that § 6 of the TFR of the LDA does not contradict the Constitution. Our considerations are the following: The provision of § 6 of the TFR of the LSA aims to rearrange all cases found by it, in which the term of the right of use ceded to state property has a longer term than the ten-year term under Art. 56, para 1 Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution stipulates that the regime of the objects of state and municipal property is determined by law. This means that it may differ from the general legal regime established for private property. The Law on State Property is authorized by the Constitution to determine the duration of an established right of use over state property. The reduction under § 6 of the TFR of the Law on State Property of the term of established right of use on state property up to ten years really encroaches on the already acquired right of the user, which is protected by Article 17, paragraphs 1, 3 and 5 of the Constitution. But the application of all the provisions of Article 17 of the Constitution with regard to all property, and not only with regard to the right to property, is not a literal but a corresponding application. This means that the specifics of one or another property right also determines the manner of application of the respective paragraphs of Article 17 of the Constitution. Thus, for example, Article 17, paragraph 1 on guaranteeing the inheritance of the right to property cannot be extended to all property rights, some of which are intuito personae (in view of the person) and are inheritable. This is the case, for example, with the service contract for service and construction contracts, when the latter is concluded in view of the individual. These contracts are terminated with the death of the user, the executor of the order or the manufacturer. The use of the legal entity in favor of which it was established shall also be terminated. The specifics of the separate legal institutions, in connection with which rights guaranteed by Art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution arise, shall require the respective application of Art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution. The right of use is not the real right of ownership itself, the compulsory expropriation of which is regulated by Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. The shortening of the term of the right of use of her property ceded by the state is not expropriation in the sense of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution. The very right to property, although inviolable, is not beyond the possibilities of the state to forcibly alienate it for state and public needs under the conditions of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. Hence the conclusion that it is not impossible to reduce the term of the right to use a state property under conditions that are consistent with those provided for in Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. The conditions and the order for expropriation for state and municipal property refer only to the expropriation of the real right of ownership. When encroaching on other property rights, only the basic principles should be observed. With § 6 of the TFR of the Law on State Property the legislator has assessed that under the current economic conditions the establishment of the market economy and the privatization of state property would be difficult if one state property weighs established in favor of another right of use for a period longer than ten years. Therefore, the current regulation of the LSA (Art. 56, para. 1) stipulates that the term for which this right can be established should not be longer than ten years. The radically different regime of property types, introduced by the 1991 Constitution, necessitates a rearrangement of state property relations in accordance with it. It is known that under the 1971 Constitution, the so-called national (state) property was ceded for gratuitous use to cooperatives, public organizations, and citizens, indefinitely. With the shortening of the term from § 6 of the TFR of the LSA, equality is created between the subjects, in whose favor a right of use was established before the current LSA and those who received it under Art. 56, para 1 of the LSA. The opposite would contradict Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, according to which the law must create and guarantee to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity. This determines the need of the state to encroach on already acquired rights under established law. of use with a longer term. The reduction of the term under § 6 of the TFP of the LSA may cause damage to the affected person. He must be compensated for them. The court, before which the question of compensation is raised, will assess whether outside the return of the price paid by the user, respectively the time for which the term is reduced, compensation is due and in what amount. The provision of § 6 TFP of the LSA does not affect free trade. initiative in the economy (art. 19, para 1 of the Constitution). It does not prevent the user whose right of use has been curtailed from continuing his business using another site. As already mentioned, the affected person will receive appropriate compensation if he is harmed. It was stated that the impugned provision equates those who received the right to use under the old law regime with those who received it under the new law. The equalization, which is made by § 6 of the LPA, is in accordance with the legislative protection of all economic entities, provided in Article 19, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. Moreover, the Constitutional Court has had cases to rule that the principles of Article 19, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution are not absolute (Decision № 7/2000 under Code of Civil Procedure № 7/2000, SG, No. 78/2000). They may be restricted in protection of other values ​​(Decision № 3/2000 under Code of Civil Procedure № 3/2000, SG, issue 37/2000). And according to Decision № 18/97 under c.d. 12/97, SG No. 110/97, the right of economic initiative has no absolute character. The freedom of economic initiative does not exclude the principles of state regulation and state control over state activity. The statement that the shortening of the term in respect of already concluded contracts affects the principle of the rule of law (Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution) is unfounded. The retroactive introduction of a substantive civil law norm is not prohibited by the Constitution. The Constitutional Court had occasion to take a position that in the field of substantive civil law the reverse effect of the law does not violate the Constitution and it does not exclude the right of the National Assembly to adopt retroactive norms in this matter (Decision № 9/92 under Art. .e. № 4/92, SG, issue 94/92). It was pointed out that in the cases when the term for which the right of use has been established is reduced, if damages have been caused, they should be compensated by the general claim procedure. This follows from the respective, not literal application of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. Hence, the principles of the rule of law are not violated in this regard either.
OPINION
FROM SHELL BULGARIA AD

According to Kld. Ho 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

On behalf of Shell Bulgaria AD please accept, at -
forward, the satisfaction of the opportunity given to us to
be an interested party in a case pending before
Constitutional Court and take a stand on issues that
the court is called upon to decide.

As one of the largest investors in Bulgaria, Shell
Bulgaria AD is a company that is interested in stability
of the legal order. This includes the stability of
the legal relations in which the private legal entities are parties
with entities that also have public law quality and exercise and
sovereign powers.

As in our request for our constitution as
interested party in the case is noted, the request is placed
issues whose resolution in a certain way the company is
interested. It is about the possibility through legislation
to influence legal relationships that have been established
on the basis of the current - at the time of their occurrence
legislation. In this regard, please note that
the case of 6 6 MANPADS is not unique. A similar provision is
also contains in the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Law on
municipal property (also 6 6).

We consider that the request made to
The Constitutional Court in the present case will act in this way
on the legislature that will lead to the removal of
the current legislation of all cases in which the state
has intervened by law in private law relations to the extent
which go beyond the constitutionally established and admissible
limits of state intervention.

In terms of> the constitutional foundations of
the economic system in the Republic of Bulgaria, which are contained in
the provision of Article 19 of the Constitution, we uphold
the opinion that the state and municipalities can have a private
property because of the opportunity open to them to perform
economic activity and to be participants in the civil turnover. When
the exercise of private property, however, all legal
entities, including the state and municipalities, are equal.
Art. 19, para 2 and 4 of the Constitution refer not only to the citizens and
legal entities, but also for the state and municipalities.

These are provisions adopted by the Constitutional Court in
evils or oiaaii
apply - in addition to all legal entities - to the bodies of
the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. It follows from them
moreover, after the existing legal order allowed in a given
moment granting the right to use real estate - private
state or municipal property, without period restrictions, for
which use is ceded is not permissible by law
change this term to be changed in relation to those that have already occurred
legal relations. The retroactive effect of law does not
complies with the rule of law enshrined in
the Bulgarian Constitution.

Please, when considering and resolving the above case, yes

take these considerations into account as well.
I.
Gentlemen judges,

By order of 13 February 2001, cited above
constitutional case, the Constitutional Court has allowed for consideration
the request of a panel of the PP Division of the Supreme Administrative Court for
establishing the unconstitutionality of 8 6 of the transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act / SG, iss. 44
from 21.U. 1996 and its inconsistency with the provision of Art. 1 of
the Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights
of man and fundamental freedoms / in force for the Republic of Bulgaria from 7
September 1992 /

The cigar transitional provision 6 6 of the State Act
property provides that for the established in the prescribed manner until the entry of
this law in force the right to use real estate - private
state property indefinitely or for more than 10 years the term shall apply
under Art. 56 of the law from the date of its entry into force; and when this one
ten years has expired by that date, the property should be handed over to
six months from that date. And according to the cited provision of Art. 56 from
The Law on State Property right to use real estate -
private state property cannot be established for a period longer than 10
years.

1. According to Art. 17, para. 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria
private property is inviolable. Undoubtedly, the concept of «
property »is used in a much broader sense than the one it has and

legal and technical. According to para. 1 of this provision, the law guarantees no
not only the right of ownership, but also the right of inheritance. And the last one
right covers all the property of the testator, ie. all property
rights. And this guarantee is realized precisely through the announcement of these
rights to inviolability.

But nevertheless it is indisputable that the rules on
immovable property also applies to the rights over them, ie. they find
application to both property and limited property rights
over them. The latter enjoy the same protection as the
property rights. In this sense is the provision of Art. 11 of the Law on
property. This understanding is reflected in the decisions of
The Constitutional Court referred to in the request of the Supreme Administrative
court.

Furthermore, by providing for the termination of an established right to
use of real estate - private state property 6 6 from
the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act,
although established indefinitely or for a period longer than 10 years, is detrimental
this right. That is why this provision is unconstitutional.

2. In our understanding, there can be no question of a reference in this case
of the provision of para. 5 of Art. 17 of the Constitution. Gazi provision creates
possibility for forced expropriation of property for state and
municipal needs. It does not provide in the abstract for the expropriation of property, but
establishes that this can be done for state and municipal needs under
provided by law order and prerequisites. Quite naturally the need for
satisfaction of which the expropriation is carried out, must be specific, i.e.
the state or municipality must need a specific property.

In the case of the contested provision, it actually leads to «
expropriation ”,“ nationalization ”,“ socialization ”like all state ones
properties encumbered with an established real right of use shall be released from
this right regardless of whether there is a need for it or not.

3: In fact, the main issue here should be rather
to the extent that the principle of the rule of law established in accordance with it is not infringed
Art. 4, para. Art. 5, para. 5 of the Constitution. Because with the considered 8 6 of
the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act
are affected and terminated legally acquired rights in accordance with
the legislation in force at the time of their generation. In that
these rights arise under contracts, ie. by the common will of
the state on the one hand and the natural or legal person -
user on the other. The legislator, therefore, intervenes in a situation
legal relationship - a contract for the establishment of a real right of use, such as
decrees its termination and repayment of the incurred for one
country right. On the other hand, the legislator also gives retroactive effect
of the new law, which is inadmissible. The principle of the rule of law is that
the new law is valid only for the future, which follows from the provision of Art. 5,
al. 5 of the Constitution.

4.> It is beyond any doubt that the provision in question of 8 6 neev
compliance with Art. 1 of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Protection
human rights and fundamental freedoms. As exactly stated in
the request of the Supreme Administrative Court the term "property" in this
clause should not be understood in its legal and technical sense. That's not it
means simply possessing things, but encompasses all goods,
included in the property of a legal entity. This means that the protection of
the right of use should also be granted under this text.

CHAIRMAN OF
SUPREME LAW COUNCIL

 

in
ON CD. F 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

As a> interested party in the proceedings before
The Constitutional Court, which is also a party to
the proceedings before the Supreme Administrative Court, the composition of which has referred to the Constitutional Court
court, on behalf of the International Center for Corporate Governance
AD, please take into account the following additional considerations
in resolving the issue of compliance of 66 MANPADS with
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and with Art from the additional
Protocol to the ECHR:

1 In the attached administrative case He 4918/2000 are contained
evidence that the right of use has been ceded to
the company in accordance with the current at the time of
assignment legislation. Order He RD-15-176 / June 8, 2000
of the District Governor of Sofia District for seizure of a school
Bistritsa base, on the complaint against which this case was initiated,
directly states as its basis the fact that by virtue
of 68 6 of the Law on the Use of Excise Duties, the term of the right of use has expired. IN
our appeal against this order
the unconstitutionality of the provision of 8 6 due
its contradiction with art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution is pointed out as
one of the grounds for appeal. A matter of discretion on the part of
the composition of the SAC, considering the appeal, is to put before

The Constitutional Court questioned the constitutionality of
provision which is the basis of the dispute raised for
the legality of an order challenged in court. In this sense
we emphasize once again that the order was not issued due to
that the right of use has been ceded contrary to the law,
which was in force at its inception, and as a direct consequence of
the effect of the 6 6. Considerations relating to
the legality of the establishment of the real right (which itself
in itself is not disputable and cannot be disputed), they are not
constituted an assessment at no stage of
the procedure for issuing and appealing the administrative act
nor by the administrative authority which issued the contested act,
nor (ie even less) as a subject of judicial review.

It is more than obvious that considerations of this nature do not
can be - neither directly nor implicitly - relevant to
the decision of the case by the Constitutional Court.

2. For the convincing existence of grounds for raising
the question of> the constitutionality of 6 6> MANPADS
testifies to “the content of the request,” addressed 0 to
The Constitutional Court. It fully 3 meets the requirements for
"Establishment" within the meaning of Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

3. Regardless of the specifics of referral to
The Constitutional Court in the case - under the condition of art. 150, para 2 of
The Constitution, the decision of the Constitutional Court will act
egra otpez. It will determine the outcome of the specific case that gave rise to it
the dispute for constitutionality, but does not constitute a decision on
this case. Moreover, those brought before the Constitutional Court
questions do not only concern the specific case, but an indefinite number
a number of other similar cases in which other legal entities
suffer the consequences of the action of 6 6 MANPADS.

4. The content of these effects includes the alienating
effect of the provision, which is why it puts it in relation to
17, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution, to which it must correspond.

Since it is not disputed that the transitional provision of 66 is
intended to settle "existing" legal relations, her
the alienating effect results from the way it has settled them, a
not from its purpose, i.e. from whether it is intended to alienate or not.
Whatever the other purpose of the provision, it must comply with
The Constitution should not create unconstitutional consequences.
Even if it is assumed that the existing legal relations are also subject to
rearrangement according to the term under art. 56, para | ZDS, whatever
consideration can hardly be deduced from the "regime" of
state property within the meaning of Art. 17, para 4 and by

The constitution "in general," again 4 arises "the question of
the preliminary and equivalent compensation in the sense of art. 17,
para 5. The requirements of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution cannot
be neglected in the name of any "balance" between
the interests of the state, on the one hand, and those of others
legal entities, on the other. Quite the opposite: it is through compliance
of these requirements the necessary> fair is achieved
balance (because to> expropriation as a last resort against
property is resorted to in the public interest), and expropriation
without payment of compensation which reasonably corresponds to
the alienated property interest constitutes unjustified interference by
country of the state.

5In that regard, it should be borne in mind that
the equality of economic operators does not follow that and
the state as such has "constitutional" rights. These rights are
established in relation to the state and its obligation is to guarantee
their exercise, not to justify their harm by
non-existent her rights. As far as the protection of the state
property is also in the public (but not in “state”) interest
therefore absolutely necessary, the need for such
protection does not create for the state the right to harm the private
property outside the conditions provided for in the Constitution.

6. By the way, the constitutional framework in which the state can
to act in hypotheses that fully correspond to the present one
case, are clearly outlined in the decisions of the Constitutional
court to which both the request and our initial opinion are
refer.

In the present case, the Constitutional Court must
rule on matters which do not differ from those already resolved,
so there are no grounds for the court to deviate from the previous ones
your decisions. 7
OPINION

of the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation
on constitutional case He 1/2001

The Constitutional Court has admitted for consideration on the merits the request of
composition of the 3rd Department of the Supreme Administrative Court for establishing the unconstitutionality,
as well as the non-compliance with Art. | of the Additional Protocol to the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), of 5 6 of
The transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act,
which reads:

“For what has been established in accordance with the established procedure until the entry into force of the law indefinitely
or for more than 10 years of right of use the term under Art. 56, para. 1
from the date of its establishment. When the period has expired on the date of
entry into force of the law, the property is transferred within six months of the same
date. ”

1. On the compliance of 6 bot TFP of the LSA with the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria

We fully support those set out in the request of the Third Department of
Supreme Administrative Court considerations in which are detailed
the grounds for declaring the unconstitutionality of the said provision
due to contradiction with art. 17, para. 3 ial. Article 5 19 of the Constitution.

In addition, we would like to draw your attention to the following
arguments in support of this opinion:

1. The reasons for the draft LSA do not set out any considerations for
the inclusion in the law of the disputed provision by which the existing ones are rearranged
cases of a right of use established before its entry into force. Even if we accept
the assumption of the applicants that the purpose of the legislator was with this norm to
correct a possible> unacceptable> benefit caused by
irresponsible disposal of state property, the law affects too broad
circle of public relations. Under the old legislation the law
of use is established both for a fee and free of charge. In the first case
it cannot be presumed that it is an irresponsible order, because it is
price paid at tariffs set by the state administration for assessment of
the properties and the real rights over them. In the latter case, it must be borne in mind that
that this provision mainly concerns cases of gratuitous assignment of a right to
use on desolate lands. As a result of the perfectly concluded contracts with
the state users have ennobled lands without value or with minimal
such and have turned them into valuable properties. As a result of this provision they
they lose their duly established real rights without it being provided for
their compensation for the damages and lost profits actually suffered by them.

2. As stated in the request made, with 6 6 of the TFP of the VAT Act de facto
expropriate existing real rights over state-owned property.
The question of the constitutionality of such expropriation is also raised in
connection with art. 33 of the LSA, according to which “the state may perform
forced expropriation of property - private property, only to satisfy
such state needs, as a result of which the expropriated property becomes public

state property." This text further develops the guarantee of Art. 17, para. 5 from
Its constitution should also apply in the present case, which is of limited concern
Property Law. It is difficult to assume that in any case
the right of use over state property ceded until the entry into force of the law,
which is now expropriated according to 6 6, will satisfy such state needs, c
as a result of which the property will become public state property.

3. Paragraph 6 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Law on
state property also reflects on established before the adoption of this
law superficies on state land. According to the repealed Art. 15, para. 3 of the Act
for ownership, the right to build on state land or state or
municipal plot includes the use of the undeveloped part of the land by
the superficial owner. This is a special provision that excludes
the application of the general rule provided in Art. 64 of the Insurance Act, restrictive
the superintendent 's right to land only to the extent necessary for
use of the building according to its purpose. That is, the limited real property
the right to use the undeveloped part of the property is included in the superficies
right to state land. After the repeal of Art. 15, para. 3 ZS and in the absence of
a similar norm in the Law on State Property, the regime of superficial ownership of state
land is equated with that on land owned legally or physically
faces.

This raises the question of the powers of the superintendent who acquired the right
of ownership On a building or building right on state land before
adoption of the LSA. Insofar as the right to build in these cases includes something else
limited real right - the right to use the undeveloped part of the land,
it could be assumed that in this case too 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA applies. IN
in cases where the right to build is established indefinitely, it is established indefinitely
and the right of use over the undeveloped part of the property and therefore the term of
the right of use will have to be reduced under the rules of 86 in connection with Art.
56 ZDS. This significantly restricts the rights of the superficies
owner, who also acquired the right to use state property, since
the latter right shall be revoked after the expiration of the period specified in Art. 56 of the LSA term.

4. Undoubtedly, the concept of "private property" includes a wide range
property rights of a person. In this case, the encroachment on acquired
property rights and in particular limited property rights should
be complied with the provisions of Art. 17 of the Constitution.

In the request for declaring unconstitutionality on 8 6 are set out
considerations for the fact that none of the requirements of Art. 17, para. 5 from
The Constitution - with the entry into force of 6 6 an indefinite circle of persons are deprived of
property rights, by virtue of the law itself, and not by individual acts, which it does not
makes it possible to establish on a case-by-case basis the existence of a state
or a municipal need and the impossibility of satisfying that need in another way,
as well as to provide advance and equivalent compensation.

The Constitution provides for “forced expropriation ... on the basis of
law". This should be understood in the sense that by law they must be regulated as
the preconditions for and the consequences of deprivation of property and is assumed
stable and understandable, accessible and sufficiently secure, predictable
legislation. In the absence of such legislation,
the administration to act arbitrarily in case of confiscation of property.

5. With the adoption of 6 6 the state, using its legislative power,
encroaches on acquired property rights of other persons and at the same time
benefits yourself. Thus the state as a business entity
rearranges existing contractual relations in its favor, not only deprives.
the persons affected by the legally acquired real right of use, but also in a number
cases makes it impossible or at least incredibly difficult to undertake
them business initiatives. This, for the reasons set out in detail in the request,
contradicts the provision of art. 19 of the Constitution and the principle of
the rule of law.

The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria has had cases to point out that
encroachment on an undertaking constitutes, in a broad sense, encroachment on
the right to property guaranteed by Art. 17 of the Constitution, and that
unpredictability in the field of private law relations is incompatible with
market economy and the protection of free enterprise; and
investments (thus decision He 1/1996 under const. e, He 29/95 and decision He 3/2000 under
const. d. He 3/2000).

At the same time, this raises the issue of compensation for those affected
not only for the deprivation of their real right, but also for all actually suffered as a result
of its revocation damages and losses. The LSA itself does not provide for compensation of
the persons affected by the measure provided for in 6 6 of its TFP. Really, that's it
principle does not exclude the possibility that they may seek redress in the general order.
However, the State's liability for damages caused by the measure is excluded
under Bulgarian law due to the fact that a prerequisite for implementation
her, both on a contractual and tort basis, is that the damages occurred in
result of illegal action. The provision of this measure by law
excludes the illegality of its application J.

Only in cases of relinquished right of use
those affected could seek sums under Art. 55 of the CPA, as part
of the price corresponding to the remainder of the agreed term would be paid to
the ground has disappeared. However, even if such a claim were to be respected, it is
the award would not constitute compensation, but simply the return of part of
the contract price.

Those affected could also seek payment for work done on the property
improvements. In normal civil relations in this regard, they would
had the opportunity to exercise the right of retention until the payment of the debts
their amounts. In this case, however, 6 6 of the TFP of the Law on State Property turns the properties into holdings without
grounds state property, which are seized by the order of art. 80 ZDS by order of

the district governor. Its appeal in principle does not suspend the execution, and in
presence of the formal preconditions for application of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA and for
its issuance, there would be no reason to claim its illegality, ie.
there would be no ground for its appeal and for a possible suspension of
its execution by the court. This is another inadmissible and unconstitutional
privilege and benefit of the state as a pure country

civil law relations.

All these circumstances, indicating extremely serious in scope and
depth affecting a wide range of legally acquired rights, make it even more
unacceptable in principle inadmissible rearrangement with retroactive effect of
substantive relations, which contradicts the provisions of Our law
principle of operation of the substantive law from now on and of the constitutional ones
guarantees of ownership, business initiative and the rule of law.

P. On the compliance of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA with Art. 1 of the Supplementary

Protocol (Protocol Xe) to the European Convention on Human Rights and

fundamental freedoms

1. The term "property" within the meaning of Art. | of the Ho Protocol

In the Bulgarian text of Protocol He published in the State Gazette s
The term "property" is translated as used in the original texts of
English and French words “rovez510p5” !, respectively “U1epz” ?, which have more
broad meaning (especially the French term, as the European Court of Human Rights)
the person has noted in interpreting the provision).

In its constant practice on the application of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1
The European Court has ruled that "property" is not only property rights, but also
a number of other acquired and sufficiently defined property rights,
constituting generally "valuable assets". He found that the guarantee of the text.
covers property collateral (the case of Gazus Dozir - und Förderteknik OOD against
The Netherlands3); receivables that the interested party may claim to have at least
"legitimate expectation" to materialize (eg Pressure company Naviera AD and
etc. v. Belgium ’), economic interests related to the functioning of
enterprises, respectively the licenses, constituting essential conditions for the business.
and associated with a long - standing expectation of the right to exercise (Tre Traktorer
Akciebulag v. Sweden, Fredin v. Sweden); the so-called "Woofu 1" - clientele,
fame, reputation and business standing (Van Marle et al. v. the Netherlands ”).

Therefore, the European Court of Human Rights has taken it widely
interpretation of the concept of property, as perceived by the Constitutional Court
of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Undoubtedly, the limited real rights over real estate as standing
as close as possible to the right of ownership fall into the category of rights
protected by Art. | of Protocol Xie 1. It is also undisputed that the present case concerns.
existing, already acquired property rights - 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA affects.
right of use, duly established before the entry into force of this law.

Similar to Art. 19 of the Bulgarian Constitution, the European Convention
protects the constituents of "property" within the meaning of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1,
economic interests related to enterprises for the operation of which
the established right of use on state property in a large number of cases has occurred
essential condition. Withdrawal before the term in which the holders are legally
relying on them to exercise it undisturbed, he seriously encroached on theirs as well
business in general. The European Court has ruled in several cases that deprivation of
basic conditions for doing business, which has unfavorable
consequences for good standing and its value, constitutes intervention in
exercise of the right guaranteed by that provision, such as the withdrawal of
a license to sell alcohol to the applicant 's restaurant business under
the case of Tre Traktorer Akciebulag: “The court finds that economic interests,
related to the operation of the restaurant! "Cardinal" are "owned" by
the meaning of Art. 1 of the Lo! Protocol. It has already been accepted that the license is valid
one of the main conditions for the implementation of the company's business -
applicant and its withdrawal has adverse consequences for the good
location and value of the restaurant. Thus the withdrawal
represents in the circumstances of the case interference in the exercise of

n.

the right of the TTA to "use its property peacefully".

Therefore, there can be no dispute that with 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA is implemented
state intervention in the exercise of what is guaranteed by Art. | from
Protocol Ho! right.

2. Which of the three rules of art. | of the Ho Protocol is applicable in the case

In its judgment in Sporung and Lönnrot v. Sweden8, the Court
accepts:

"This text contains three separate rules. The first thing that has in common
nature, proclaims the principle of peaceful use of property - that is
enshrined in the first sentence of the first subparagraph. The second concerns
"Deprivation of property" and subject it to certain conditions - that is
enshrined in the second sentence of the same paragraph. The third gives to the states
the right, inter alia, to control the use of property in
in accordance with the general interest by adopting such laws as they deem appropriate
necessary for that purpose - it is contained in the second subparagraph. "

In their judgment in James and Others v. The United Kingdom?
he clarifies:

"The three rules contained in Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 are not
"separate" in the sense of a lack of connection between them. The second and third rules
concern special cases of interference in the exercise of the right to the undisturbed
use of the property and should therefore be considered in
in the light of the general principle set out in the first rule. "

From this interpretation of the provision given in the cited founders
judgments, the European Court has been adamant to this day.

The criterion which the European Court applies in assessing whether it concerns
"deprivation of property" within the meaning of the second rule is the extent to which it is
completed, final and irrevocable revocation of the title and repayment
of law.

In the present case, a right of use terminated by virtue of 6 6 of
TFP of the VAT Act before the expiration of the term for which it was assigned, there is a withdrawal
of a valid established right, which, in our opinion, constitutes deprivation of
"property" within the meaning of the second rule of Art. | of Protocol He 1. Without being
carries out expropriation in accordance with the procedure provided by law, providing
the guarantee of art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution, is achieved through legislation
the same effect - the real right of use is taken away from the holder and passes
back on the naked owner, final and irrevocable.

The situation in the case of the Holy Monasteries against Greece is dire !.
The Greek state has established a rebuttable legal presumption of statehood
ownership of monastic lands and forests for which monasteries cannot
prove their right to property. Before the European Court, the government argued
that it is merely a procedural rule relating to the burden of proof.
The court notes, however, that at the same time the monasteries were deprived of
opportunity to prove their ownership in all general ways provided by
Greek law, for example by establishing an acquisition by prescription. In the condition of,
that can be explained property titles dating back to the time of the Byzantine and
The Ottoman empires were lost or destroyed, and much later
establishing a system of property registration, the Court held that it was a question of
a substantive provision that results in a transfer of ownership
on the state. He finds that there has been a deprivation of property within the meaning of
the second rule of art. | of Protocol Xe 1.

3. Conditions under which deprivation of property may be justified by
in terms of Art. | of Protocol Xe

The European Court of Human Rights has repeatedly emphasized in

its practice that deprivation of possessions is the most drastic intervention in
exercising the guaranteed by art. | of Protocol Xe 1 right to undisturbed
use of property. Such interference does not infringe this right only if they are
the following three cumulative conditions are met: 1) to be taken "in the interest of
society "; 2) be proportionate to the aim pursued and 3) be lawful
("in accordance with the conditions laid down by law and in the general principles of
international law ").

The first and third conditions are expressly provided for in the rule on
deprivation of property, and the second stems from the requirement that this rule be
interpreted in the light of the general rule in the first sentence of para. | of Art. | from
Protocol He! for undisturbed use of the property, as well as by
the principle of a fair balance implemented throughout the Convention, which should
achieved between the interests of society and the rights of the individual.
"The demand for such a balance is inherent in the Convention as a whole and is also reflected in
the structure of art. 1 of Protocol L01. "(Sorung and
Lenroth).

Moreover, even in cases where the Court finds that there is no revocation
ownership and examines the measures taken in terms of the rule,
contained in the second subparagraph or of the general rule laid down in the first
sentence of art. | of Protocol Ho1, he proceeds from the same in his assessment
conditions for the admissibility of interference in the exercise of the right to
undisturbed use of possessions and especially by the requirement for
a fair balance between the interests involved.

4. "In the interest of society"

The European Court of Justice has held that the State enjoys a wide freedom to
assesses what is in the public interest and what measures should be taken
taken to protect this interest. However, this freedom cannot lead to
abuse of power or overt arbitrariness.

In his judgment in James et al., He noted:
of course, the discretion which the legislature has in
implementation of social and economic policy to be broad, the Court will
took into account the conclusion of the legislature on what is “in the interest of
society ”, unless this conclusion is clearly unreasonable
reason. ”

As mentioned above, the reasons for the bill on the state
property do not contain a justification of the measure regulated in 8 6 of the TFP. Can be
suggested that it was undertaken in pursuit of the aim of protecting the state
property, which according to Art. 18, para. 6 of the Constitution is managed and
governs in the interests of citizens and society.

At the same time, this measure is essentially unilateral
cancellation by the State of one of its contractual obligations under Article

its capacity as a party to a civil legal relationship. The European Court is
accepted in some cases that the state could intervene by law and
to rearrange conditions under existing contractual relations between private parties
persons, as well as to amend or even terminate its contractual relationship with
such persons!?. However, such interference is not permissible in respect of any
clauses of the contract, and can be done only under certain conditions -
damages and procedural guarantees which the Court considers in the context of
the requirement For a fair balance between the public interest and those concerned
individual rights (see point B below).

In the case of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA it concerns the unilateral termination of
contractual relationship to which the state itself is a party, by legislative means - with
the means of power, without any procedural guarantees for those concerned
individual rights and without compensation. Therefore, apart from the requirement for
fair balance, such a move could be seen as an abuse of
power.

At the same time, the Constitution and the LDA connect the public interest mainly with
the right to public state property - the objects of such property
at all can not be encumbered with real rights, forced expropriation of
private property is permissible only if the property will become public state
property, etc. However, the discussed provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA is not
restricts public state property to the sites. Especially when it comes to
for a retroactive measure, it is unacceptable from the point of view of the public interest
to extend to all objects of state property - public and
private.

It is inadmissible for a law adopted in implementation of the established by
Constitution democratic principles, including the abolition of
the existing privileges for state property, to put
the state in a privileged position in relation to the other party - a citizen or
legal entity - when it has the quality of an equal party to
an outstanding civil law relationship has also arisen.

In a democratic society with a market economy, legal certainty and
the stability of legally established contractual relationships are also
significant public interest affected by the provision in question
inadmissible way.

In addition, this legislative measure affects a wide range of legal holders
established right of use, without any discretion in each
individual case. This poses a serious risk in a number of specific cases

circumstances to prove that the revocation infringes on individual rights, without c
actually serve the purpose pursued by 5 6, even if it is assumed that it is
in the public interest.

B. Proportionality of the measure

In all hypotheses of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1, the Court finds
whether a "fair balance" has been struck between the interests of the community and
the requirements for the protection of the fundamental rights of the individual, although here too
a wide discretion of the legislator is usually allowed.

In the case of James et al. The court held:

"The measure that takes away a person's property is not just necessary
to pursue a legitimate aim "in the public interest" in the specifics
circumstances and in general! 3, but there should also be a reasonable attitude of
proportionality between the means used and the purpose to be achieved
achieve. This requirement is expressed in other words in the Sporung judgment
and Lonroth with the notion of "fair balance" to be achieved
between the requirements of the general interest and the requirements of the protection of
basic individual rights. The required balance will not be found if
the person concerned must bear "individual and excessive burden". "

In this regard, the Court first examines whether the person concerned
receives appropriate compensation - not only in cases of deprivation of
property, but also in those to which it accepts as applicable the general rule in the first
sentence of para. 1 of Art. | (for example in the cases of Sporung and Leonrot v
United Kingdom and Erkner and Hofauer v. Austria! 4). He accepts that
“The obligation to pay compensation derives from an implicit one
condition contained in Art. |! of Protocol Mo 1, analyzed in its entirety "(Lithgow and Lithgow
etc. against the United Kingdom).

In its judgment in James and Others, the Court emphasized:

“As for Art. 1 of Protocol M1, the protection of the right of
the property he provides would be completely illusory and inefficient at
the absence of any principle of equivalence. It's obvious that
the conditions for compensation are relevant in assessing whether the disputed
legislation respects the fair balance between the various stakeholders
interests and, in particular, whether it does not impose on the applicants
disproportionately large weight.

The Court also accepted the Commission 's conclusion on the standard of
compensation: confiscation of property without payment of compensation,
reasonably consistent with its value would usually
constitutes disproportionate interference which would not be considered justified
according to art. | of Protocol M 1. However, this text does not guarantee the right of full

compensation in all circumstances. Legitimate purposes in the “interest of
society ”, such as the objectives pursued by economic reform measures or
measures aimed at achieving greater social justice can
require compensation below the full market value. "

The lack of any possibility and mechanism for compensation
the persons affected by f 6 of the TFP of the LSA, positively violates requirements
of Art. 1 of Protocol No. 1 a fair balance between the public interest and
protection of individual rights. That's reason enough to
finds that the measure contradicts this provision.

In addition, it should be borne in mind that the assessment of the existence of
The European Court of Justice makes a fair balance in each case, even
the relevant law to pursue a legitimate aim in the public interest and even
the means chosen by the legislator for its achievement to be in principle compliant with
the requirements of art. | of Protocol No. 1.

Affected by 6 6 people are burdened with one personally and excessively
burden, without any procedural possibility to establish whether in their
In a specific case, the measure actually achieves the objective pursued by law in
public interest and, even if so, whether it is proportionate to that aim, i.e. whether
the requirement of art. | of Protocol Xe fair balance.

In three cases against Greece (Katikaridis et al. 8, Tsomtsos et al
Papachelas8), the applicants> objected to> the irrefutable legal
presumption that the owners of the properties bordering the main road benefit from
its construction or improvement and should therefore be included in those made
from the state costs, receiving compensation only for part of their expropriated for
the whole earth. The European Court has found a violation of Art. 1, para. 1, assoc. 1 of
Protocol He 1. It notes that the principle of compensation has been established in everyone
one case to be reduced by an amount equal to the value of land with a width of 15 m.,
without giving the affected owners the opportunity to prove that in fact
the event in question does not benefit them, or brings them less, or even less
causes them damage to varying degrees. "This very inflexible system does not
taking into account the diversity of cases, ignoring in particular the differences,
due to the nature of the construction works and the location of
the affected properties. It is clearly devoid of reasonable grounds. Regarding
of a large number of owners, it necessarily violates the fair
balance between the protection of property rights and the requirements of
the public interest. ” (judgments in the Katikaridis and Tsomtsos cases, to which
also refers to the judgment in the Papachelas case).

The court concluded that the applicants "were forced to bear
individual and overweight that could be treated as

legitimate only if they had had the opportunity to prove the allegations
harm yourself and, if successful, receive appropriate compensation. "In all these cases
The Court did not find it necessary to assess whether the applicants really were
suffered damage. According to him, the necessary balance has objectively ceased to
exists in their very legal position.

Similarly, by virtue of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, the affected holders of
the right in rem may not rely on any specific
their specific cases circumstances, nor can they seek compensation for
the damage suffered. Therefore, they bear a personal and excessive burden,
incompatible with the requirements of a fair balance between the interests of the individual by
on the one hand and society on the other.

On the plane of a fair balance between these interests
The European Court has found violations in cases of state interference in
exercise of the guarantees of art. | ost Protocol He 1 rights carried out
by law and retroactively, leading to the repayment of already
arising under a contract or tort
the state.

Thus, in the case of Greek refineries Stran and Stratis Andreadis, there is a law
annulled arbitral award, which is final and binding
recognized debt of the State to the applicants. The European Court considers that it is
the general rule in the first sentence of Art. 1, para. 1. The Greek
government points out that the purpose of the measure was to eliminate the effects of
military regime - the claim arose from a preferential contract, damaging
national economy and helped maintain the regime. In the decision of
The European Court points out:

"The court has no doubt that it was for the democratic Greek state
necessary to terminate a contract which it considered to be prejudicial
economic interests In fact, according to the practice of
international and arbitral tribunals each state has sovereign
power to amend or even terminate a contract concluded with private individuals, as long as
to pay compensation. This simultaneously reflects “the recognition that
the supreme interests of the state take precedence over the contractual ones
obligations, and takes into account the need to maintain one
fair balance in contractual relations. However, one-sided
termination of a contract does not produce effect in respect of some
essential clauses thereof, such as the arbitration clause. "

Noting that Greek law recognizes the autonomous nature of
arbitration clauses and that the claim arose before the termination of the contract,
The court found that the legislative interference had violated the requirements
fair balance.

In the case Pressos company Naviera AD and others. complaints have been addressed
against the effects of a law by which the Belgian Parliament has restricted
the liability of the state and of private companies licensed by it for damages,

caused by negligence on the part of them or their servants in the provision of
pilotage of ships in territorial waters. It was the law
retroactive effect for a period of 30 years before the date of its entry into force
in force. He thus deprived the applicants of their claims for damages for
damage from accidents that occurred before that date. The court held that although
the claims in question have not been established with effect and are subject to
enforcement of judgments under Belgian law they arise from the moment
of the damage and, therefore, constitute an "asset" and hence a "property" under
the meaning of Art. | of Protocol He 1. The applicants had “legitimately
expectation that their claims for damages suffered as a result of
accidents before the law enters into force will be recognized accordingly
the general provisions on tort. The court finds that it is about
deprivation of property within the meaning of the second sentence of Art. 1, para. | from
Ho 1 Protocol, carried out with a legitimate aim in the public interest. He, however,
finds a violation of the requirement for proportionality of the implemented
intervention. "The economic considerations put forward by the Government, and
his desire to unify Belgian law with that of neighboring countries are
could impose existing legislation in this area,
deviating from the general provisions on tort. Such
considerations cannot justify retroactive legislation,
having as its object and effect the deprivation of the applicants of their claims
for compensation. Such substantial interference with the exercise of the rights of
the applicants is incompatible with ensuring a fair balance between
the interests involved. "The Court therefore finds a violation of Article | of
Protocol Xe 1, as regards the events preceding the entry of the law into
force.

Even in cases of control over the use of property (where
the intervention is not as drastic as in the case of confiscation), the Court has held important
significance of the circumstance whether at the occurrence of the legal relationship
the owner (right holder) was aware of the legal situation and
the prospects associated with it. So in the case of Alan Jacobson v. Sweden !?
The court did not find a violation, because when buying the property placed by the authorities
under a prolonged building ban, the applicant could not have been absent
aware of these perspectives. In addition, there were procedures giving
periodically the opportunity to compare the public interest with that of
the individual.

Early revocation of a permit for extraction of gravel by ecological
considerations which led to serious losses for the applicant was accepted as
in accordance with Art. | of Protocol Xe in the Fredin case. The court has substantiated this
conclusion that the applicants had begun to invest funds
seven years after a legislative change clearly provided for
the potential for revocation of existing permits, after
the expiration of ten years from its entry into force. The applicants were
aware of the possibility of losing their permission. Thus the decision of

the competent authorities to allow them to build service extractions
facilities contained an explicit reservation in this regard. The Court notes in
in addition, the applicants were granted a period of three years to
closing the business and that the authorities have shown some flexibility as they are
extended this period by 11 months.

The holders of the right of use, affected by 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, who are
they had every reason to expect that they would be able to do it undisturbed
exercised for the period for which it was established and could not have guessed
retroactive legislative intervention, are deprived of any such protection
of your interests. Such an encroachment is unacceptable in all cases, but it is
particularly drastic in those in which the 10-year period has expired at the time of
the entry into force of the LSA and 6 6 gives them only 6 months to take steps to
compliance with the surprise deprivation of their rights.

C. "In accordance with the conditions laid down in law and in the general principles of
international law "

(a) The principle that a measure is lawful requires that it be based on
sufficiently accessible, accurate and predictable national legal rules and
provided protection against arbitrariness, which is expressed in procedural guarantees.

The European Court of Justice does not, in principle, examine whether domestic law is
applied correctly. In this case it is a legislative measure with effect towards
all falling within the scope of 8 6 persons, therefore no question is asked about
compliance with this provision in each specific case, unless, for example
order under Art. 80 of the LSA will be issued by an improper body before the expiration of 10-
the annual term or other similar hypotheses.

The measure of early revocation of the right of use itself is provided for in
a provision meeting the requirements of accessibility, accuracy and predictability, and
there are remedies available to provide sufficient procedural guarantees in the case of
illegal application.

At the same time, however, expropriation was actually carried out without
observance of the conditions provided for in the Constitution and the LDA itself.
The persons concerned could not have foreseen a possible revocation
their established real right in violation of the clear and precise requirements of Art. 17,
al. 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

6) In the cases of James et al. and Lithgow the Court held that the reference to
the general principles of international law in Art. | means that the principles are
incorporated in the provision, but only in respect of the actions to which
these principles are usually applied, ie. the actions of the state towards foreigners
citizens.

The early termination of the right to
Undoubtedly, its use also affects persons who are not citizens of the Republic of Bulgaria. In their cases

this measure is also contrary to the Convention due to a violation of the general
principles of international law incorporated in the provision of Art. 1 of
Protocol 1.

These principles unconditionally require adequate compensation for those affected
faces. In the mentioned cases, James et al. and Lithgow the Court cited Resolution
(52) 1 of 19 March 1952. of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
approved the text of the Protocol and it is open for signature and which states that
“As regards Article 1, the general principles of international law, as
are currently understood to include the obligation to pay
compensation in the event of expropriation of persons who are not nationals of
the country concerned ”.

Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the LSA does not meet these requirements or taken
independently, nor considered in connection with the other provisions of the Bulgarian
law applicable to the consequences of its operation.

In conclusion, our view is that the provision in question ev
contradiction both with the indicated texts of the Constitution of Bulgaria,
so count. That Protocol F 1 to the ECHR. By declaring private property
for inviolability and allows its forced expropriation for state and
municipal needs only on the basis of law, provided that these needs do not
can be satisfied in another way and after in advance and equally
compensation, our Constitution provides for a stronger protection in
comparison with Art. 1 of Protocol Xe 1. However, in the absence of
possibility to compensate the affected persons and of any kind
procedure for establishing the necessary fair balance between
public and individual interest in each case, she
violates the not so strict requirements of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1.
on constitutional case Mo 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Pursuant to Art. 18, para. 2 of the Constitutional Court Act and
Order of the Constitutional Court of 13.02.2001, I express the following
opinion in connection with constitutional case Mo1 / 2001, instituted on
13.02.2001 at the request of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court under
the order of art. 150, para. 2 of the Constitution for> establishment of
unconstitutionality of the provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Law on
state property (promulgated, SG, issue 44 of 21 May 1996) due to
contradiction with art. 17, para. Zi B Art. 19 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria and for non-compliance of the same provision with Art. 1 of First
Additional Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Rights
freedom.

1. As grounds for establishing the unconstitutionality of
the above provision of the State Property Act in the request of Sh
Department of the Supreme Administrative Court alleges:

T. Contradiction with Art. 17, para. Zi 5 of the Constitution

The petitioner rightly claims that the right to private property is
inviolable, referring to the enduring practice of
The Constitutional Court under “ownership” should be meant by a more
broad term, "including all rights in the patrimony of a person."
The right to property should therefore be understood in a broad sense,
i.e. "Including other property rights." Should be considered,
that the provision in question applies equally to the property of
legal entities - individuals and legal entities, as well as private
state property.

The petitioner further wrongly claims that the provision of
Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Property Act is an action of
compulsory expropriation of private property within the meaning of Art. 17, para. 5
of the Constitution and Article 101 of the Property Act. The forced
expropriation is essentially an administrative activity carried out on
basis of the law, following the realization of a complex factual
composition, the elements of which are explicitly specified in the law. Art. 17, para. 5 from
The Constitution contains the principle of expropriation. IN
a number of regulations contain special provisions concerning
the right of the state in certain cases and preconditions to alienate
compulsory property of other legal entities - such are the provisions
of Chapter Three, Art. 32 - 42, of the State Property Act,
the provisions of Chapter Three of the Municipal Property Act, Part
fourth of the Spatial Planning Act, etc. In this case we do not have
fulfillment of the factual composition required for the institute of compulsory
alienation, even if we assume that alienation is possible. Neither
the reasons, nor the considerations, nor the purpose, nor the result of the legislative
activity is the creation of an act of expropriation, nor of expropriation
provision. Hence the lack of any grounds to seek justification
of the existence of a state need which cannot be satisfied under
otherwise, as well as advance and equivalent compensation
the legal framework, where there is talk of expropriation of property, is available
first of all: private property and private property outside of
state private property, ie cannot be expropriated private
state property. The procedure for changing the quality of a property from private
state property in public, and vice versa is regulated in the Law on
state property with explicit legal provisions. "As for
the possibility of expropriation - within the meaning of the law -
limited property rights, as well as other property rights, we can
assume that in addition to real estate ownership, can be
expropriated in accordance with the requirements of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution and others
property rights of legal entities in favor of the state. (Same
upholds the Constitutional Court in decision Mo 22 of 10.12.1996 under const.
Case Mo 24/96 “... a private claim may be ... declared for
state. It can be forcibly expropriated, but only under the conditions
of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution ... ”). Such alienation from others
property rights can be done only on the basis of a normative act where

to indicate the criteria for state, resp. municipal need that
it cannot be satisfied in any other way. Such a normative act concerning
other property rights, other than the right of ownership over real estate
real estate is currently missing in our law. Does not represent> more
its essence - such a norm and the provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Law
for state property.

With the amendments to the State Property Act of 1998 (SG, issue 124
of 1998) the provision of Art. 57 of the same law, which
allowed the District Governor to take away by right the right of
use established on real estate private state property, if
the need for the property disappears in the person of the user or the property becomes
necessary for another urgent state need. The provision was repealed with
right because it could be used to circumvent the law on
the constitutional requirements for expropriation of property rights,
perceived in a broader sense. In this case it was not about expropriation in
the legal meaning of this concept, and for a special order unilaterally
termination of the duration of the right of use in certain
prerequisites. The law also explicitly provided for a form of compensation for
proven damages.But such an expropriating norm does not represent and
the provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
property. It does not specify the actual composition required for compulsory
expropriation, neither the criteria for state need are substantiated, nor are
provides compensation because the norm has no such purpose. In essence
the norm is not alienable, but distributive, having retroactive
action in respect of existing legal relations and is not independent, ae
in direct relation to Art. 56, para. 1 of the State Property Act.
The petitioner himself claims that in this case we have no real coercion
expropriation of property or justification of such expropriation, but only
"Alienating effect". It needs to be clarified what needs to be understood
under the term “expropriation effect.” The effect of fulfilled on factual
composition of forced expropriation is the original acquisition of
owned by the state. The state can't do that either
forcibly expropriate ownership of its own real estate under
the meaning of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. As for whether she can
alienate a limited real right over his own property should be
answer as follows: this is possible, but only under the action of
a special law that justifies this possibility and the urgent need of
the State, which also provides for a duly equivalent and
advance compensation. In this case, however, we note once again that we are not
facing this case. One cannot speak of the "alienating effect" of
a norm which explicitly speaks only of the application of the law
established term. Even if the norm concerns existing legal relations and yes
reduces the term of use of the property, one cannot speak of “alienable
effect ", as this term has become necessary in our law. It is reduced
a term that is in principle a modality in a given
legal relationship and although essential for development
of this legal relationship, he does not exhaust it.

What has been said also concerns the issue of compensation. Provided that
we have no expropriation can not be asked the question of compensation
this ground. Compensation under our law follows either from the law or from
realization of the factual composition, containing culpable harmful behavior
and a harmful result between which there is a causal link. In this case
compensation cannot be claimed as the law does not provide for it and
because no harmful illegal action of
a state body acting in accordance with Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
property. Nor can a request for
mandatory> statutory> provision “ruling on compensation and
complementary to the action of Paragraph 6. The Constitution in two places speaks of
compensation: this is the case of Art. 17, para. 5, when we have the hypothesis of
forced expropriation and art. 7, concerning the responsibility of the state for
damages caused by illegal acts or actions of its bodies and
officials. Nowhere else in the constitutional provisions
a conclusion can be drawn in support of the claim that the State owes
compensation in all cases of settled or rearranged relations.
The issue of the obligation to return unduly duckling is quite another,
if any. In the present case, the State must repay the sums
prepaid for the right to use property established for more than ten
years from the date of return of the property or the order for
seizure. But in this direction is the overall practice of the Council of Ministers.

The issue of the request of the PP Department of the Supreme Administrative
a vessel must be placed entirely on the plane of admissibility
the opposite> effect of a legal norm affecting pending
legal relations.

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in Art. 5, para. 1 proclaims
the principle of non-retroactivity of criminal law. In his
decision Mo 9 of 20.06.1996. The Constitutional Court disseminated this
principle and for the tax legal norms, proceeding from the legality
of taxes, at the time of occurrence of the tax event. Although
in principle, the Constitutional Court excludes the possibility of retroactive effect
of substantive tax rules, in the same decision he admits it, with
consideration that this achieves a fair result. Art. 14 of the Law on
normative acts in principle allow the reverse effect of legal ones
norms, if it does not concern aggravation in the content of sanctions
provisions. The other requirement of the law is that the opposite action be explicit.

From the above we can conclude that there is no constitutional and
legal obstacle to the retroactive effect of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Act
for state property.

P. The contradiction with Art. Article 19 4, para. 1 of the Constitution.

The plaintiff justifies the impossibility of the retroactive effect of the norm
on the grounds that “through a special law economic relations are rearranged in
to the detriment of the constitutionally guaranteed rights of economic entities ”and that
thus the state influences the existing legal relations under which it is
country; and paragraph 6 of the TFP of the LSA is not only public

will of the state, but also its private will in its capacity and
to a party to an existing contract ” It is inadmissible to claim that the act of
The National Assembly, adopted in the manner prescribed by law, may represent
an act of private will. This is off a rpop as a feature of
the legislature. It is not taken into account that the state may act in
two qualities - in its capacity as a public body, through its bodies of
state power and administration and as a private legal entity entering the
equal principles in the private legal turnover. When the public authority of
the legislature enacts certain provisions concerning the private sector
legal relations, he of course refers to the state, but already in quality
and to a private legal entity. Of course, it is possible to rule
powers of relevant state bodies to be used
illegal in cases where only private matters
the legal will of the subjects and, accordingly, to be influenced by laws
unconstitutional on the private legal sphere, but this is not the case here
such. For example, the plaintiff on several occasions unreasonably refers to
decisions of the Constitutional Court in this sense. In support of its request,
he referred to decision Mo 17 of 16.12.1999. of the Constitutional Court,
where it is unequivocally stated that “interference in private legal relations is in
violation of art. 19, para. 1 and para. 2 of the Constitution, respectively
affirm the principle of free enterprise and guarantee
equal legal conditions for economic activity ... because it is interference in
legal relations between equal subjects, in which the state
it is simultaneously switched on and regulated in the way it considers
appropriate. " All this is true, but it concerns the state's attempt to
accommodates and regulates specific private legal relations. The last one
it is really unacceptable. In the case of constitutional case Mo1 / 2001 we do not have
something like that. The provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
property is a common and impersonal norm. It applies to an unlimited range
legal entities that it treats in the same way.

As regards the assertion that the provision of Paragraph 6
contradicts Art. 4, para. 1 of the Constitution on the grounds that it infringes
predictability of the rule of law and legal certainty in general, we want to
express our following opinion: Paragraph 6 is directly related to Art. 56, para.
1 of the law, which quite justifiably determines the maximum possible term
of the right of use on private state property. This norm
applies to all legal entities. This rule is of "general" or "public"
interest. State property, including private property, represents
national good, they are a treasure of public importance. For this and
there are special laws governing rights, orders and others
legal actions regarding state property. It is in this spirit and
the restrictive term of art. 56, para. 1. The norm of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Law
for the state itself equalizes the position of legal entities in
its ability to be used equally and under equal conditions by
national goods - in this case private state property.
It is unfair and unjustified for certain legal entities to be able to
benefit from limited national goods to a greater extent and in more
long period of time at the expense of other entities, - precisely because of

the limitation of these goods - for which the law has ruled imperative
term of use.

In conclusion, we want to say that the norm of the law is of "general" or
"Public" interest, which protects goods from national and public
meaning that whenever we talk about "free business initiative" and
private legal interests, modern democratic, social and legal
state, adjusts the "collective interest". The principle of balance
between "private" and "collective" interest is at the core and spirit of ours
Constitution.

In resolving the issue of the unconstitutionality of Paragraph 6
of the TFP of the Property Act, the Constitutional Court must issue and
from understanding the appropriateness of your decision. We mean
the following: the norm of the law in question has been in force since 01.06.1996; such as
since then, many properties have been returned or confiscated under
the effect of the norm; they are accordingly provided for use under
the statutory order of other private legal entities or declared for
public state property. If the Constitutional Court rules
the unconstitutionality of the norm of Paragraph 6, this confronts
the same uncertainty the users of these properties have trusted
the law and we would certainly face a case of interference now
in the sphere of private law of the subjects of private law, who trust in c
the current legal order.

Our opinion "on the" request for "the establishment of
unconstitutionality of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
ownership also applies to a finding of a conflict with paragraph 1 of
PDKPCHOS, as the provision in question was essentially repeated by
our Constitution in its part on the inviolability of the private
property. The peculiarities of the cited practice of the European Court are in
that it always refers to a specific legal relationship, resp.
legal relations with well-known parties, subject (s), rights and obligations. For
this is the W department of the Supreme Administrative Court was supposed to work
carefully, when through them he wanted to judge the action of the impersonal and
abstract legal norm.

I hope that with the above I contribute to the fair resolution of
dispute. :
ON CD. F 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

As a> interested party in the proceedings before
The Constitutional Court, which is also a party to
the proceedings before the Supreme Administrative Court, the composition of which has referred to the Constitutional Court
court, on behalf of the International Center for Corporate Governance
AD, please take into account the following additional considerations
in resolving the issue of compliance of 66 MANPADS with
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and with Art from the additional
Protocol to the ECHR:

1 In the attached administrative case He 4918/2000 are contained
evidence that the right of use has been ceded to
the company in accordance with the current at the time of
assignment legislation. Order He RD-15-176 / June 8, 2000
of the District Governor of Sofia District for seizure of a school
Bistritsa base, on the complaint against which this case was initiated,
directly states as its basis the fact that by virtue
of 68 6 of the Law on the Use of Excise Duties, the term of the right of use has expired. IN
our appeal against this order
the unconstitutionality of the provision of 8 6 due
its contradiction with art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution is pointed out as
one of the grounds for appeal. A matter of discretion on the part of
the composition of the SAC, considering the appeal, is to put before

The Constitutional Court questioned the constitutionality of
provision which is the basis of the dispute raised for
the legality of an order challenged in court. In this sense
we emphasize once again that the order was not issued due to
that the right of use has been ceded contrary to the law,
which was in force at its inception, and as a direct consequence of
the effect of the 6 6. Considerations relating to
the legality of the establishment of the real right (which itself
in itself is not disputable and cannot be disputed), they are not
constituted an assessment at no stage of
the procedure for issuing and appealing the administrative act
nor by the administrative authority which issued the contested act,
nor (ie even less) as a subject of judicial review.

It is more than obvious that considerations of this nature do not
can be - neither directly nor implicitly - relevant to
the decision of the case by the Constitutional Court.

2. For the convincing existence of grounds for raising
the question of> the constitutionality of 6 6> MANPADS
testifies to “the content of the request,” addressed 0 to
The Constitutional Court. It fully 3 meets the requirements for
"Establishment" within the meaning of Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

3. Regardless of the specifics of referral to
The Constitutional Court in the case - under the condition of art. 150, para 2 of
The Constitution, the decision of the Constitutional Court will act
egra otpez. It will determine the outcome of the specific case that gave rise to it
the dispute for constitutionality, but does not constitute a decision on
this case. Moreover, those brought before the Constitutional Court
questions do not only concern the specific case, but an indefinite number
a number of other similar cases in which other legal entities
suffer the consequences of the action of 6 6 MANPADS.

4. The content of these effects includes the alienating
effect of the provision, which is why it puts it in relation to
17, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution, to which it must correspond.

Since it is not disputed that the transitional provision of 66 is
intended to settle "existing" legal relations, her
the alienating effect results from the way it has settled them, a
not from its purpose, i.e. from whether it is intended to alienate or not.
Whatever the other purpose of the provision, it must comply with
The Constitution should not create unconstitutional consequences.
Even if it is assumed that the existing legal relations are also subject to
rearrangement according to the term under art. 56, para | ZDS, whatever
consideration can hardly be deduced from the "regime" of
state property within the meaning of Art. 17, para 4 and by

The constitution "in general," again 4 arises "the question of
the preliminary and equivalent compensation in the sense of art. 17,
para 5. The requirements of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution cannot
be neglected in the name of any "balance" between
the interests of the state, on the one hand, and those of others
legal entities, on the other. Quite the opposite: it is through compliance
of these requirements the necessary> fair is achieved
balance (because to> expropriation as a last resort against
property is resorted to in the public interest), and expropriation
without payment of compensation which reasonably corresponds to
the alienated property interest constitutes unjustified interference by
country of the state.

5In that regard, it should be borne in mind that
the equality of economic operators does not follow that and
the state as such has "constitutional" rights. These rights are
established in relation to the state and its obligation is to guarantee
their exercise, not to justify their harm by
non-existent her rights. As far as the protection of the state
property is also in the public (but not in “state”) interest
therefore absolutely necessary, the need for such
protection does not create for the state the right to harm the private
property outside the conditions provided for in the Constitution.

6. By the way, the constitutional framework in which the state can
to act in hypotheses that fully correspond to the present one
case, are clearly outlined in the decisions of the Constitutional
court to which both the request and our initial opinion are
refer.

In the present case, the Constitutional Court must
rule on matters which do not differ from those already resolved,
so there are no grounds for the court to deviate from the previous ones
your decisions. ,,
on

are and will OPINION

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE
vi a ON CONSTITUTIONAL CASE He 1/2001
»REGARDING:“ Request of a panel of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court

to establish the unconstitutionality of 6 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act and
its inconsistency with Art. | of the Additional Protocol to the

Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The case was initiated at the request of a panel of the Supreme Court
administrative court to establish the unconstitutionality of 6 6
of the TFP of the State Property Act / STA /, as the importers
point out reasons for contradiction of the provision with art. 4, para. 1, art. 17,
al. 3 ial. 5 and Art. 19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as well as
its inconsistency with a generally accepted norm of international law.

With a ruling of 13.02.2001 on a constitutional case
Ho 1/2001, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration under
essentially constituted the Minister of Finance as interested

party to the case.

In view of the opportunity given to me by the definition, I express
the following opinion:

1. The request to establish the unconstitutionality of
8 bot TFR of the State Property Act:

According to the challenged provision of the State Act
property for the established in the established order until the entry of the law in
force indefinitely or for more than 10 years the right of use applies
the term under art. 56, para. | - 10 years from the date of its establishment.
When the term has expired on the date of entry into force of the law, the property
shall be submitted within six months from the same date.

The request maintains that the cited provision is inadmissible
affects existing contractual relationships in which the state, such as
participant in the civil turnover, is obliged to act under the same legal
conditions with the other participants - citizens and legal entities, due to
which is a contradiction with Art. 19 of the Constitution. In his own way
content and purpose this norm is a "deliberate legislative act with
alienating effect ", inconsistent with the constitutional requirements for
conducting forced expropriation of private property for
state needs, due to which there is a contradiction with Art. 17, para. Zee
al. 5 of the Constitution. This "direct alienating effect" violates
the principle of separation of powers, as related to inadmissible
seizure by the National Assembly of functions of the executive branch.
The norm acts on already existing legal relations, party to
which the State itself, as a business entity, has entered into valid obligations,
therefore unilateral extrajudicial " termination of these
relations contradicts legal certainty - an element of
the content of the principle of the rule of law, proclaimed in Art. 4, para. 1

of the Constitution.

I do not share the “views of the applicants on the following
considerations:

The arguments set out in the request do not take into account the fact that the essence
of the challenged provision is to legally rearrange legal relations,
arising and settled under the repealed Constitution of
1971, as well as the one repealed by the State Property Act
Real Estate Ordinance, adopted in 1975. Another important argument
is the adoption of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in 1991, which
in part 17, para. 4 refers to the regime of the objects of the state and
municipal property will be determined by law. It is
the constitutional basis for the adoption of the State Law
property, which enters into force on 01.06.1996 and is special
Act with respect to the Property Act, enacted in 1951. This
a new law contains a complete and different from the existing one
regulation of acquisition, management and disposal of real estate and
movables, state property. The legislator could not
fulfill the requirement of art. 17, para. 4 of the Constitution and to determine for c
future regime of state and municipal property, if
did not include in this regime the existing legal relations. It wouldn't be
possible legal relations arising and settled in accordance with
already repealed acts, not to undergo reorganization, only
because it is the constitutional obligation of the state to guarantee and
protects the inviolability of private property. Obligation of
the state is to protect all the fundamental constitutional rights of
citizens. There is no constitutional prohibition on the state giving up or not
restrict the exercise of its constitutional rights when it would
could affect the rights of others. To be considered unconstitutional and

any state interference with the right to property is inadmissible,

means to limit the right of the state to settle it at all or to
settle it in a way that would be acceptable only to certain legal entities
subjects, but not for society as a whole. As far as the Constitution
requires the state to guarantee and protect property rights and
declares private property inviolable, this also applies to
state property.

The legislator in settling the matter in a new way in
the field of property achieves a fair balance between interests
of the state and other legal entities in the exercise and protection.
of property rights. In order to ensure equality between
private property, regardless of its objects and subjects, he has canceled
the prohibition on the application of the acquisitive limitation period in respect of property -
private state and municipal property, including them in this order
again in the civil turnover. In view of the nature, purpose and
the status of public state and municipal property, the legislator is
ensure and guarantee its protection by removing it from civil circulation,
by excluding it from the objects of the acquisitive prescription. Taking into account
the peculiarities of the real right of use, as well as the impossibility of
the state owning the bare property to exercise its right to
claim, the legislator with 6 6 creates a mechanism to
prevent the acquisition of state and municipal property
properties from third parties for the existing legal relations.

The allegation in the request that the challenged provision of 8 6 targets
expropriation of the existing real rights is insolvent. Alienation
implies a change in the nature and type of ownership, and leads to
the need to pay equivalent compensation, in execution
of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. In case of established real right of use

on state property after the application of 8 6 there is no change of

property. In any case, the holder of the terminated right of
use has the possibility to file a claim for compensation under
court order. The essence of the provision of 6 6 is determined by
its systematic place in the law and the intended legal consequences that it
settles. Obviously, it is intended solely for
the existing legal relations. With 6 6 the legislator aims to settle
legal relations in view of the quality of the object of the right of use -
state property and not in view of the subject - the holder of the right to
use. The right of use is a real right over another's property, for which in
Art. 59 of the Property Act provides for the possibility of
time limit. The right to property is an absolutely real right
and establishing a right of use, the owner is deprived of a definite
its power with respect to the exercise of property. IN
in this case, the right of use should not be linked only to
the implementation of economic activity. Without the provision of 8 6 it would be
not applicable para. | of Art. 56 of the LSA, in view of the requirement that the state
exercises its right of ownership over real estate at
the conditions and the order provided by this law, regardless of
the circumstance whether the right of ownership has been acquired by the state
before or after the entry into force of the law, according to the provision of art. 9
from ZDS. The effect of the provision of art. 9 of the LSA is unthinkable without
the rearrangement of the existing legal relations in accordance with the new ones
conditions referred to in the law. In this case, the new is normative -
the established term for the right of use. Assuming that the right of
state property cannot be restricted and established for
indefinitely, the legislator has introduced the term under Art. 56, para. | from ZDS.
It accepts that that time - limit must also apply to

the indefinite or for more than 10 years established by the state right to

use, as the preservation of an indefinite real right in
the existing legislation before the adoption of the Law on
state property would force the state to tolerate restrictions
of its own right of use. By rearranging his relationship with
affected persons, the State shall, on the one hand, recognize the existence of
their rights, and on the other hand with the norm of 6 6 brings them in
compliance with the rights of all others under the LSA to ensure equal
legal conditions for the use of state property. The legislator
whenever it determines the conditions and restrictions within which
develops a type of legal relationship, should enable in
a certain term for the existing relations to be rearranged in
compliance with the new legal conditions. It would be inadmissible to find
legal relations to determine legal conditions other than those introduced
with the law, because it is in such a case that it can be maintained
opinion that the rule of law proclaimed in
Art. 4, para. | of the Constitution. It is a matter of legal technique to determine
the manner of impact of the public law norms adopted by the LDA,
on the existing legal relations.

In view of the above, I consider the legal certainty as
necessary element of the rule of law is not violated by the disputed
provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, which does not limit the right to defense
of the persons concerned.

P. The request for a finding of non-compliance with 6 6 of
The transitional and final provisions of the State Act
property with art. 1 of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on

protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms:

I am of the opinion that that provision does not contradict
generally accepted norms of international law, setting out the following
considerations:

According to Art. 1 of the Additional Protocol any physical or
a legal entity has the right to peacefully use its property.
No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the interests of
society and in accordance with the conditions provided by law and in general
principles of international law. Transitional provisions do not
in no way infringe the right of States to introduce such
laws they deem necessary for the exercise of control
on the use of the property in accordance with the general interest or for
ensuring the payment of taxes or other proceeds or fines.

The request before the Constitutional Court states that
the provision of 6 6 inadmissibly violates the right of individuals to
enjoy their property, indicating the decisions of
European Court of Human Rights and arguments are set out in
support the assertion that any expropriation without payment of
appropriate compensation violates the requirement of fair balance
between the public interest and the fundamental right of the individual and
constitutes excessive> state interference in
the implementation of the economic activity of those affected by the application of
8 bot TFP of ZDS commercial companies.

The norms of the Constitution reproduce the general meaning of
the provision of art. | of the Additional Protocol and as set out in
The first part of the opinion also concerns the request for the establishment of
inconsistency of the attacked text of 6 6 with the generally accepted norms of
international law. The meaning of the term "property" referred to in

the cited provision of the Convention is not explicitly defined.

Analyzing the text, I believe that it guarantees fundamental rights and
freedoms, one of which is the right to property without regulation
the limited property rights which are the subject of an explicit regulation in
local legislation. It is noted that everyone has the right to
uses his property and no one can be deprived of it,
except in the public interest and under the conditions laid down in
of the law. The provision of 6 6 corresponds to the cited requirement, as
by virtue of legislation in the interest of society> unifies

the regime of the right of use.

DEAR GENERAL CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In the light of the foregoing considerations, I consider that the request for a declaration
the unconstitutionality of the provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the Law on.
state property and its non-compliance with the generally accepted norm of

international law is unfounded and should be rejected.
Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

By order of 13 February 2001, the Constitutional Court of the Republic
Bulgaria constitutes the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works
as an interested party in the constitutional case Me1 / 2001, instituted under
request of a three-member panel of |! department of the Supreme Administrative Court
by the order of art. 150, para 2 of the Constitution, for “establishment
unconstitutionality and incompatibility with the European Convention on Protection
human rights and fundamental freedoms of par.b from the transitional and final
provisions of the State Property Act. :

In this regard, we consider that the provision of par. B of the TFP of the Law on
the state property does not contradict art. 17, para 3 and 5 and art. 19 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, due to the following arguments:

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in Art. 17, para. 4 provides for the mode of
the objects of the state and municipal property to be determined by law. IN
implementation of this provision, the State Property Act has been adopted,
which is special in relation to the general Law on Property. In this sense
it should be assumed that the regulation of real rights over objects -
state property may deviate from the principle laid down in the general
law. According to Art. 62 of the Property Act, the provisions on
the right of use over state property shall apply, unless in law or in
an act establishing this right is provided otherwise.

It is necessary to keep in mind that in para. B the legislator aims at settlement
of legal relations in view of the quality of the object of use - state
property, and not according to the subject - the holder of the right of use.

The right of use is a real right over another's property, for which in art. 59 of
The Property Act provides for the possibility of limitation with a term.
The legislator did not explicitly regulate a certain term, considering that
the duration depends on the will of the property owner and is determined in
the deed of incorporation.

Since the right of use is in the category of personal rights, the law

provides to be repaid with the death of the user, respectively with
the termination of the user - legal entity. A ban has been created for
expropriation by the user and the owner is given the opportunity to
terminate early the right of use in case of violations of
significant obligations on the part of the user.

In the sense of the above, it can be concluded that after
the legislator in the general law introduces a number of restrictions on the right of
use and provides for the possibility of restrictions by a special law - Art. 62
of the Insurance Act, the norm of par. b of the TFP of the Insurance Act does not violate the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria does not contradict the rule of privacy
property.

If we accept the thesis advocated by the composition of || department of the Supreme
administrative court, this would mean assuming that the user has more
large or equal rights with the owner. The right to property is absolute
real right and establishing the right of use, the owner is deprived of
certain authority with regard to the exercise of property.

Furthermore, the rule at issue must be considered in the context of
the systematic place of art. 56, para 1 of the LSA, to which he refers. It does not apply
for the right of ownership, and for the right of use and concerning properties - private
state property, the rights to which are regulated by the Law on State Property.

The place of par.b, namely - in the transitional and final provisions of
the law shows that the aim is to bring it into line with the provision of
Article 56, paragraph 1 of the LSA all existing cases. Otherwise, it would be created
inequality with regard to the holders of the right of use over
state property depending on the time of establishment.

The statement that the provision of para.6 cannot be accepted unambiguously
of the TFP of the LSA leads to mandatory and unconditional termination of the right to
use of property - state property. In this case it is about
reduction of the term of the respective right of use, which does not exclude
the possibility to be re - established at a later date, subject to
the relevant legal requirements. This is aimed at protecting the state
interest, as the disposal of state property is carried out at
the conditions of the competitive start / tenders and competitions /.

The provision of para. B of the LSA does not contradict Article 19 of the Constitution,
as it creates conditions for equality of economic entities. The right
of use should not necessarily be subject to the existence of
business and initiatives.

The mode of> management of> state> property includes
mandatory balance and frequent assessment of dynamic needs and relationships in
the state. The finding that the state is a major owner of real estate
properties, cannot substantiate the request for revocation of par.b of the TFP of the LSA. On
this may be counteracted by the fact that as a result of the adoption of
a number of normative acts, as well as changes in the legislation of the Republic

Bulgaria, a huge number of properties passed from the state to the ownership of
municipalities and individuals. Moreover, in the Law on Political Parties, the Law on Political Parties,
The Labor Code, the Health Insurance Act, etc. was imputed to
obligation of the state to provide a building stock for a number of needs. Now,
especially in the district centers, there is an acute shortage of building stock for
administrative needs.

The unconditional interpretation of para. B of the TFP of the LSA as
expropriation procedure. Expropriation implies a change in the nature and
the type of ownership, as well as the need for equivalent compensation. IN
the cases of established right of use on state property, respectively
the application of par.b, there is no change of ownership. In most cases,
under the repealed Ordinance on state property, the established right
of use is free. In each case, the holder of the terminated
right of use has the possibility to file a claim for compensation
judicially.

The provision of para. B of the TFP of the State Property Act does not
contradicts Article 1 of the First Additional Protocol to the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, under the following
considerations:

The meaning of the term "property" embedded in the cited provision of
convention is not explicitly defined. Analyzed in its entirety,
we believe that the text guarantees fundamental rights and freedoms - one of which is
the real right of ownership, without regulating the limited real rights,
which are subject to detailed regulation in local legislation.

The minutes explicitly state that everyone has the right to benefit from
their property and no one may be deprived of it except in accordance with
the conditions provided by law. We believe that paragraph b6 of the TFP of the LSA corresponds
of the cited requirement, as by virtue of a legal provision it is unified
the regime of the right of use.

The protocol stipulates that everyone has the right to use their own
property and no one may be deprived of it except in the interest of
society. We believe that the basis of the provision of par. B of the TFP of the LSA is
namely the public interest, which requires the establishment of a right to
use of property - state property, to be as described in Article 56 of

ZDS ranks for a period not exceeding 10 years. Road
THIRTY-EIGHTH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AFFAIRS AND
LEGISLATION AGAINST CORRUPTION

 

OPINION

of the Committee on Legal Affairs and

anti-corruption legislation

SUBJECT: The ruling of the Constitutional Court of
13.02.2001, received on 14.02.2001, with the request of
The Supreme Administrative Court, with which the National Assembly is
constituted as a party under c.d. Me 1/2001 to establish
unconstitutionality and inconsistency with the First Supplement
Protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
human and fundamental freedoms of 9 6 of the transitional and final
provisions of the State Property Act.

At a regular meeting held on 22.02.2001, the Commission
on legal issues and anti-corruption legislation discussed
The ruling of the Constitutional Court of 13.02.2001, received
on 14.02.2001, with attached> the request of the> Supreme
administrative court, with which the National Assembly is
constituted as a party under c.d. Me 1/2001 to establish

unconstitutionality and inconsistency with the First Supplement

Protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
human and fundamental freedoms of 9 6 of the transitional and final
provisions of the State Property Act.

Following the debate, the Commission unanimously decided to
provided to the Constitutional Court to resolve the dispute.
DEAR PRESIDENT,

We support the request of the Supreme Court
administrative court to establish proshiVonkonstputsionnospila of
56 osh Transitional and final provisions / TFP / of the “Law on
Our state property / ZDS / and its incompatibility with tea. 1 osh
First additional weekly code to the European Convention for the Protection of
It is the right of man and fundamental freedom, as for the sake of moshivishe
exposed osh Vnoshpelshie, shaKka n due to the following additional
considerations:

THE RIGHT OF OWNERSHIP As absolute and broadest Real
The right includes not only the right to dispose, but also the restriction
Real rights of Possession, use and construction. Constituting Kato
The Basic Law does not de-ordinate the protection of each of these rights individually,
but to what extent, in their totality, constitute the right of
property, fall under the protection of Art. 17 a. 1 and 3 osh KRB.
Concrete protection of each other rights, between Koshpo is pp
Real right of use should be exercised op
the same laws.

It could not be maintained that the right of ownership of
STATE KASHO Absolute right is a stitching of the limited

Real right of use of citizens and legal entities
An order that your country has as its owner includes p
Possibility for voluntary restriction of the seam right, as provided in B
law order. One-sided amendment of the law
retroactively, through a public legal statement of the state,
What is directly reflected in the non-private private legal quality of
party to already concluded contracts, is a violation of Art. 57 para.
2 osh KRB, Koshpo does not allow the exercise of rights if you are harmed
legitimate interests of other children. Moreover, after the adoption of 8 6
of the TFP of the LSA, Art. 57 op the same law, which provided
compensation for users when the right of use is revoked
due to urgent state need.
on

The Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI) supports the request of
Supreme Administrative Court, III> Department of> Establishment
the unconstitutionality of> the provision of 8 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions (TFR) of the State Property Act (STA).

BCCI fully shares the arguments set out in the above request and
considers that the following "additional" grounds for
unconstitutionality of the considered norm:

1 The text in question contradicts the constitutional one
requirement for protection of investments - art. 19, para. 3.

Prior to the entry into force of the LSA, the current legislation (mainly
The Property Act and the Ordinance on State Property), with small
exceptions (eg Article 68 of the Property Act - still in force) no
set a limit on the term of the right of use. That made it possible
of the parties to the contract for use to agree on terms longer than 10 years.
It is logical that these cases involve significant investments
from the users of state properties for a certain activity, resp. -
their restoration in the longer period of use. Entrepreneurs bind
the amount of investments> mostly with the predictability of the term for
their recovery.

It is obvious that by reducing the term of the right to
use, the provision of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA contradicts the principle of
investment protection. Art. 19, para. 3 of the Constitution obliges “the legislator
to issue laws protecting and therefore encouraging investment, not
laws encroaching on investments already made ”(as decided by Me 4 / 11.03.1998
year according to const. case of the Ministry of Defense of 16/1997; also resh. MO 4 / 11.03.1998 under the const.
case MO 16/1997 of the Constitutional Court).

2. The rationing of the term of a contractually established right of use
contradicts one of the basic principles of the rule of law (Art.
4 of the Constitution) - the freedom of bargaining.

By managing private state> property, incl. and through
the granting of the right of use, the state, through the persons authorized by it
and as an equal subject in the civil turnover (decided on the case Mo
11/1993 of the Constitutional Court) negotiates with third parties the conditions of this
use, incl. and term. The norm of 8 6 of the TFP of ZDS inadmissibly regulates
change of the contractual terms of use concerning the term. In his practice
The Constitutional Court has categorically held that interference in
civil legal relations, as in an administrative way (eg res. mo
22 / 24.09.1998 under the const. case of the Ministry of Defense 18/1998) and by law (eg res.
To 17 / 16.12.1999 under the const. case MO 14/1999).

3. With the adoption of the provision of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA it is violated
the constitutional principle of separation of powers (Art. 8 of
Constitution), as the norm regulates relations that are from
competence of the executive branch (Article 106 of the Constitution) and not
of the legislature.

According to Art. 106 of the Constitution, the Council of Ministers organizes
the management of state property. The norm applies to both types
state property (public and private) and covers a set of activities -
the maintenance of state property, its use, the collection of income
etc. (thus decided by the Ministry of Defense 19 / 21.12.1993 on the case of the Ministry of Defense 11/1993
The Constitutional Court). It is indisputable that the performance of these activities involve
and the granting of real rights through which the property is maintained, used
and gives the state income.

Therefore, in the content of the constitutional concept "organized
the management of the state property ”includes the granting of a right
of use.

The Council of Ministers organizes the management of state property,
by issuing acts to empower the bodies they will manage and yes
regulates the order in which this activity will be carried out (cited decision no
19 / 21.12.1993).

Therefore, the regulation of the right to use the state
property is within the competence of the Council of Ministers

It is inadmissible for the legislature to revoke or amend decisions
which according to the Constitution are within the competence of the Council of Ministers, respectively - of its
organs.

4. The considered provision does not correspond to art. 1 of First
Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights; and
fundamental freedoms, resp. - the case law of the Court of Human Rights.

In its decisions in the Zrogopd cases, it was Goppgoy and MagsKh.
that the approved in the above-cited Art. 1 principle of respect for the right of
property (including the regulation of its use) requires compliance with
"A full balance to be struck between the protection of the law
of property and the requirements of the common interest ”.

The text of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA in no way provides this
balance for the reasons set out above in p. 1i2.

For all the reasons set out so far, the Bulgarian trade
Chamber of Industry considers that the norm of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA is
unconstitutional.
TO
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

LAT PL ъ.
OF THE UNION OF EMPLOYERS IN BULGARIA

ON CONSTITUTIONAL CASE He 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In pursuance of the provision provided to us by 13
February 2001 under cd. He 1/2001 opportunity Management
Council of the Union of Employers in Bulgaria expresses the following
opinion on the issues raised before the Constitutional Court under
this case:

The Union of Employers in Bulgaria is non-governmental
voluntary non - profit association of the owners of
companies operating on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria. Wed.
its main objectives are the formulation of general opinions.
on the existing legal framework affecting business
activity and assistance for the development of favorable legal framework
for strengthening and development of economic activity.

In the light of these goals and in terms of its overall
activity for the Union are essential principled (constitutional)
basics of the legal order in general and of the legal regulation of the economic
activity in particular.

In this respect, the Union fully agrees with
the principle statement reflected in decision G 22 of 10 December
1996 on k. e. Ho 24/1996 (SG, issue 1 of 3 January 1997) of
The Constitutional Court, which reads as follows: "The principle of legal
country contained | art. 4, para. 1 of the Constitution besides everything
otherwise it means that the foundations of the legal order laid down in
Constitution, apply equally to the bodies of
the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, and for
all legal entities ".

The Constitutional Court has reaffirmed this statement in
decision Ho 17 of 16 December 1999 under c.d. He 14/1999 (SG, issue 113)
of 28 December 1999), stating further that “the interference in
private law relations is in violation of Art. 19, para. and 2 of
Constitution, which respectively affirm the principle of
free enterprise and guarantee a level playing field
for economic activity ”.

On the other hand, it is clear that the right to free business
initiative does not and cannot have the absolute character that freedom
of a business initiative does not preclude the need for any
degree of state regulation and state control over
economic activity. The Constitutional Court itself has repeatedly
set out the criteria for determining the possible limits of
state intervention. In that regard, we refer to Decision Xe 6
of 25 February 1997 under k, d.He 32/1996 (SG, issue 21 of 1997, С6.
ROX, 1997, p.46, on p.48), where the criteria in general and
the hypotheses provided for in the Constitution are formulated most fully.
In view of them, we assume that the legislative intervention carried out with
4 6 MANPADS, does not agree with any of these hypotheses, resp. is not
justified with a view to the protection of other constitutional values. No
it is such a value in itself - and not just because it is not
explicitly mentioned in this decision of the Constitutional Court -
state property as such (as opposed to public
property within the meaning of the 1971 Constitution, i.e. in another
socio-economic> system, “completely different from
established in Article 19 of the current Constitution). It's acceptable
(art. 17, para 4 of the Constitution) the regime of the objects of the state and
municipal property to be determined by law as it actually is
and the State Property Act itself, but as the state and
municipalities can also have private property, which for them
finds the opportunity to do business and be
participants in the civil turnover, the exercise of the right to
private property takes place under the conditions of equality of
all legal entities (decision Ho 19 of 21 December 1993 under c.
He 11/1993; SG, no. 4 of 1994).

It is also true from the case materials we have,
it can be concluded that the legal provision whose questions
constitutionality and compliance with an international treaty, under
which Republic of Bulgaria is a party, are referred to the
The Constitutional Court is applied on the occasion of> found
legal relations, one of the subjects of which is the state itself. This
circumstance at first glance expands the boundaries within

which the state is authorized to regulate the legal relations under
in a manner it deems appropriate. As a party in private law
relations, however, the state must act under the conditions of
equality, not as a holder of public authority, of
sovereign powers. The opposite would mean that it is permissible
the state "arbitrarily" determines the content of
the legal relationship to which it is a party. Like the Constitutional
court has emphasized (again peak He 17 under c. d. He 14/1999), although
occasion of a different hypothesis (in which the state is involved in
existing legal relationship between individuals), similar
an act of state intervention in a legal relationship that
presupposes equal subjects, by regulating it under
legislative path in a way it deems appropriate,
exceeds the constitutionally established and permissible limits of
state intervention.

If the legislator has any reasonable grounds to fix
the period for which the right of use may be established on
real estate - private state property, as he did
by establishing such a term in the provision of Art. 56, para 1 ZDS,
the same (possible) considerations are not equally valid in
resolving the issue of the existing legal relations they have for
its subject right of use, established in accordance with the established procedure before
the entry into force of the State Property Act, as it is
the purpose of the transitional provision of 6 6. Another issue is
that in terms of the content of the real right of use and
of its regulation in the Property Act, which applies and
regarding the right of use on state or municipal property
(Art. 62 of the Insurance Act), it is obvious that it is normally and usually established for
period, significantly longer than the one fixed in art. 56, para 1 of the LSA (idea,
which is the basis of Article 59 of the Insurance Act and finds expression in this provision).

However, the reasons for this are not entirely obvious
the authorization contained in the contested transitional provision.

The existing legal relations are based on an important one
premise, which consists in the fact that the other subject of
the legal relationship has relied on the existing legal framework and
acting at the beginning of the legal relationship. In case of
this order allowed a right of use to be established for
(significantly) longer period, of course, in his
determining in each case the private entity which
very often it is a business entity to take into account a number of circumstances,

which relate to the value of the established right (which in a number
cases is assigned for consideration), up to the amount of ‘investments,
necessary for the normal or specified in the constitutive act
use, the period of their return, etc.

The unilateral termination of the legal relationship by law,
which has as its object a ceded right of use, gives rise to
problems in two directions: a) the due compensation and 6) damage to
legal certainty.

It cannot be disputed that the effect of 6 6 MANPADS has
termination effect with regard to the right of use on
state property established before the entry into force of the Law on
state property, which occurs with the expiration of 10-
the annual term. In addition, this effect is alienating because
the length of the period for which the right of use was granted
established, is an essential element of its content, from
the material dimensions of its volume. By terminating
encroaches on the price paid (where the right is established for consideration),
on the incurred investment costs, on
investment intentions and expectations, etc. The application of
the term under Art. 56 para 1 of the LSA means that the holder of the right to
use is deprived of its possession.

As in the act by which the Constitutional Court was seised, it is
noted, the court firmly held that under> constitutional
the guaranteed and protected right to property must be understood
not only real property rights in the narrow sense, but as
covering other property rights. Gakova, as standing most
close in its content to the right of ownership, it is unconditionally
the limited real right of use. His injury,
therefore, it is admissible only under the conditions of art. 17, para 5 of
The Constitution.

Compulsory expropriation of property for state and
municipal needs is a last resort that can be implemented
only in compliance with the strict requirements of this
constitutional ”provision. "The latter is important
constitutional guarantee of the inviolability of the private
property established in art. 17, para. 3. The provision of 6 6 MANPADS
does not take any account of its expropriation consequences and of
this important constitutional constraint. It does not contain a way to
settlement of the consequences arising from the expropriation and under
the force of its action precludes the possibility of being determined
advance and equivalent compensation depending on
the specifics of each case. That is why its contradiction with
Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution is obvious.

On the other hand, especially in view of the stated purpose of
Union related to the development of "favorable legal framework for
strengthening and development of economic activity ... ", we find that
provisions such as the impugned affect - given their
retroactive action - extremely negative of the legal
security. And the requirement for legal certainty that gives
opportunity for the legal (business) entity to comply with its own
conduct with existing legislation and provide
its consequences is an essential element of the principle of legal
country. From the point of view of this principle it is inadmissible to
affects a legal relationship in the establishment of which the party,
having the capacity of a private entity, has trusted
established order and has designed its behavior (including
economic) in view of a long period, as long before
the expiration of the agreed term by the state, through a law adopted by it,
puts an end to the legal relationship. There is, in this situation,
unconstitutionality and in view of the violation of Art. 4, para | from
The Constitution.

As regards the second ground of appeal
The Constitutional Court - under Art. 194, para. 1, item 4 of the Constitution, as
We accept the considerations set out in the request in relation to it,
finding that it leads to the result that also follows from the resolution
of the request for establishing unconstitutionality. In that
In this respect, we refer to the principled statement developed by
The Constitutional Court in decision He 2 of 18 February 1998 under c.d. Ho
evil ate ii pounds
according to "which" the interpretation of> the relevant provisions of
The constitution in the matter of human rights should be
in accordance with the interpretation of
the rules of ECHR ".

The request, as well as a number of other decisions of
The European Court of Human Rights goes beyond the understanding that
the notion of “possessions” within the meaning of Art.!, paragraph 1, para. | from
The Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights ia
human and fundamental freedoms has an autonomous meaning, encompasses
rights that are of a property nature and do not apply only to
real property rights in the narrow sense. And the alienation of
"property" without the payment of compensation corresponding to it
reasonable in its value, usually constitutes such an intervention by
country of the state in the exercise of what is stated in this
provision law, which can not be justified under Art. 1. С
in view of the above statement of principles set out in
solution Xe 2 pok.d. G 15/1997, for “conformal interpretation” of

The Constitution in the field of human rights the argumentation of
The European Court of Human Rights in relation to its interpretation
the application of art. of the Additional Protocol may be used
already in the substantiation of the unconstitutionality of 8 6
MANPADS in view of its contradiction with art. 17, para 3 and 5 of
The Constitution.

For these reasons, the Union of Employers in Bulgaria
takes the view that the request is well-founded and should be
be upheld on both grounds.
REGARDING: “Request of a panel of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court
to establish the unconstitutionality of 6 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act and
its inconsistency with Art. | of the Additional Protocol to the

Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The case was initiated at the request of a panel of the Supreme Court
administrative court to establish the unconstitutionality of 6 6
of the TFP of the State Property Act / STA /, as the importers
point out reasons for contradiction of the provision with art. 4, para. 1, art. 17,
al. 3 ial. 5 and Art. 19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as well as
its inconsistency with a generally accepted norm of international law.

With a ruling of 13.02.2001 on a constitutional case
Ho 1/2001, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration under
essentially constituted the Minister of Finance as interested

party to the case.

In view of the opportunity given to me by the definition, I express
the following opinion:

1. The request to establish the unconstitutionality of
8 bot TFR of the State Property Act:

According to the challenged provision of the State Act
property for the established in the established order until the entry of the law in
force indefinitely or for more than 10 years the right of use applies
the term under art. 56, para. | - 10 years from the date of its establishment.
When the term has expired on the date of entry into force of the law, the property
shall be submitted within six months from the same date.

The request maintains that the cited provision is inadmissible
affects existing contractual relationships in which the state, such as
participant in the civil turnover, is obliged to act under the same legal
conditions with the other participants - citizens and legal entities, due to
which is a contradiction with Art. 19 of the Constitution. In his own way
content and purpose this norm is a "deliberate legislative act with
alienating effect ", inconsistent with the constitutional requirements for
conducting forced expropriation of private property for
state needs, due to which there is a contradiction with Art. 17, para. Zee
al. 5 of the Constitution. This "direct alienating effect" violates
the principle of separation of powers, as related to inadmissible
seizure by the National Assembly of functions of the executive branch.
The norm acts on already existing legal relations, party to
which the State itself, as a business entity, has entered into valid obligations,
therefore unilateral extrajudicial " termination of these
relations contradicts legal certainty - an element of
the content of the principle of the rule of law, proclaimed in Art. 4, para. 1

of the Constitution.

I do not share the “views of the applicants on the following
considerations:

The arguments set out in the request do not take into account the fact that the essence
of the challenged provision is to legally rearrange legal relations,
arising and settled under the repealed Constitution of
1971, as well as the one repealed by the State Property Act
Real Estate Ordinance, adopted in 1975. Another important argument
is the adoption of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in 1991, which
in part 17, para. 4 refers to the regime of the objects of the state and
municipal property will be determined by law. It is
the constitutional basis for the adoption of the State Law
property, which enters into force on 01.06.1996 and is special
Act with respect to the Property Act, enacted in 1951. This
a new law contains a complete and different from the existing one
regulation of acquisition, management and disposal of real estate and
movables, state property. The legislator could not
fulfill the requirement of art. 17, para. 4 of the Constitution and to determine for c
future regime of state and municipal property, if
did not include in this regime the existing legal relations. It wouldn't be
possible legal relations arising and settled in accordance with
already repealed acts, not to undergo reorganization, only
because it is the constitutional obligation of the state to guarantee and
protects the inviolability of private property. Obligation of
the state is to protect all the fundamental constitutional rights of
citizens. There is no constitutional prohibition on the state giving up or not
restrict the exercise of its constitutional rights when it would
could affect the rights of others. To be considered unconstitutional and

any state interference with the right to property is inadmissible,

means to limit the right of the state to settle it at all or to
settle it in a way that would be acceptable only to certain legal entities
subjects, but not for society as a whole. As far as the Constitution
requires the state to guarantee and protect property rights and
declares private property inviolable, this also applies to
state property.

The legislator in settling the matter in a new way in
the field of property achieves a fair balance between interests
of the state and other legal entities in the exercise and protection.
of property rights. In order to ensure equality between
private property, regardless of its objects and subjects, he has canceled
the prohibition on the application of the acquisitive limitation period in respect of property -
private state and municipal property, including them in this order
again in the civil turnover. In view of the nature, purpose and
the status of public state and municipal property, the legislator is
ensure and guarantee its protection by removing it from civil circulation,
by excluding it from the objects of the acquisitive prescription. Taking into account
the peculiarities of the real right of use, as well as the impossibility of
the state owning the bare property to exercise its right to
claim, the legislator with 6 6 creates a mechanism to
prevent the acquisition of state and municipal property
properties from third parties for the existing legal relations.

The allegation in the request that the challenged provision of 8 6 targets
expropriation of the existing real rights is insolvent. Alienation
implies a change in the nature and type of ownership, and leads to
the need to pay equivalent compensation, in execution
of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. In case of established real right of use

on state property after the application of 8 6 there is no change of

property. In any case, the holder of the terminated right of
use has the possibility to file a claim for compensation under
court order. The essence of the provision of 6 6 is determined by
its systematic place in the law and the intended legal consequences that it
settles. Obviously, it is intended solely for
the existing legal relations. With 6 6 the legislator aims to settle
legal relations in view of the quality of the object of the right of use -
state property and not in view of the subject - the holder of the right to
use. The right of use is a real right over another's property, for which in
Art. 59 of the Property Act provides for the possibility of
time limit. The right to property is an absolutely real right
and establishing a right of use, the owner is deprived of a definite
its power with respect to the exercise of property. IN
in this case, the right of use should not be linked only to
the implementation of economic activity. Without the provision of 8 6 it would be
not applicable para. | of Art. 56 of the LSA, in view of the requirement that the state
exercises its right of ownership over real estate at
the conditions and the order provided by this law, regardless of
the circumstance whether the right of ownership has been acquired by the state
before or after the entry into force of the law, according to the provision of art. 9
from ZDS. The effect of the provision of art. 9 of the LSA is unthinkable without
the rearrangement of the existing legal relations in accordance with the new ones
conditions referred to in the law. In this case, the new is normative -
the established term for the right of use. Assuming that the right of
state property cannot be restricted and established for
indefinitely, the legislator has introduced the term under Art. 56, para. | from ZDS.
It accepts that that time - limit must also apply to

the indefinite or for more than 10 years established by the state right to

use, as the preservation of an indefinite real right in
the existing legislation before the adoption of the Law on
state property would force the state to tolerate restrictions
of its own right of use. By rearranging his relationship with
affected persons, the State shall, on the one hand, recognize the existence of
their rights, and on the other hand with the norm of 6 6 brings them in
compliance with the rights of all others under the LSA to ensure equal
legal conditions for the use of state property. The legislator
whenever it determines the conditions and restrictions within which
develops a type of legal relationship, should enable in
a certain term for the existing relations to be rearranged in
compliance with the new legal conditions. It would be inadmissible to find
legal relations to determine legal conditions other than those introduced
with the law, because it is in such a case that it can be maintained
opinion that the rule of law proclaimed in
Art. 4, para. | of the Constitution. It is a matter of legal technique to determine
the manner of impact of the public law norms adopted by the LDA,
on the existing legal relations.

In view of the above, I consider the legal certainty as
necessary element of the rule of law is not violated by the disputed
provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, which does not limit the right to defense
of the persons concerned.

P. The request for a finding of non-compliance with 6 6 of
The transitional and final provisions of the State Act
property with art. 1 of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on

protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms:

I am of the opinion that that provision does not contradict
generally accepted norms of international law, setting out the following
considerations:

According to Art. 1 of the Additional Protocol any physical or
a legal entity has the right to peacefully use its property.
No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the interests of
society and in accordance with the conditions provided by law and in general
principles of international law. Transitional provisions do not
in no way infringe the right of States to introduce such
laws they deem necessary for the exercise of control
on the use of the property in accordance with the general interest or for
ensuring the payment of taxes or other proceeds or fines.

The request before the Constitutional Court states that
the provision of 6 6 inadmissibly violates the right of individuals to
enjoy their property, indicating the decisions of
European Court of Human Rights and arguments are set out in
support the assertion that any expropriation without payment of
appropriate compensation violates the requirement of fair balance
between the public interest and the fundamental right of the individual and
constitutes excessive> state interference in
the implementation of the economic activity of those affected by the application of
8 bot TFP of ZDS commercial companies.

The norms of the Constitution reproduce the general meaning of
the provision of art. | of the Additional Protocol and as set out in
The first part of the opinion also concerns the request for the establishment of
inconsistency of the attacked text of 6 6 with the generally accepted norms of
international law. The meaning of the term "property" referred to in

the cited provision of the Convention is not explicitly defined.

Analyzing the text, I believe that it guarantees fundamental rights and
freedoms, one of which is the right to property without regulation
the limited property rights which are the subject of an explicit regulation in
local legislation. It is noted that everyone has the right to
uses his property and no one can be deprived of it,
except in the public interest and under the conditions laid down in
of the law. The provision of 6 6 corresponds to the cited requirement, as
by virtue of legislation in the interest of society> unifies

the regime of the right of use.

DEAR GENERAL CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In the light of the foregoing considerations, I consider that the request for a declaration
the unconstitutionality of the provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the Law on.
state property and its non-compliance with the generally accepted norm of

international law is unfounded and should be rejected.
"OPINION

OF “INTERNATIONAL COMPANY CENTER
MANAGEMENT ”AD-SOFIA

PO K. D. X1 / 2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of 13 February 2001, ruled under c.d. Ho
1/2001, the requests were admitted for consideration on the merits,
made by a staff of the W Department of the Supreme Administrative
court (SAC) under the conditions of art. 150, para 2 of the Constitution, for: a)
establishing the unconstitutionality of 6 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act
(1PZRZDS) and 6) to establish non-compliance with the same
provision with the provision of Art of the Additional Protocol to the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

With the specified definition “International Center for
Company Management ”AD has been constituted as an interested party
party to the case and is giving the opportunity to submit in writing
position.

Taking this opportunity, “please consider and
consider the following opinion:

The Constitutional Court was seised under the conditions of Art. 150, para 2,
of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The issue of non-compliance of 6 6 MANPADS with
Constitution and the First Additional Protocol to the European
Convention on Human Rights has been submitted to the Constitutional Court by
composition of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court in
connection with the proceedings in administrative case Ho 4918/2000

party, was formed on a complaint filed by the “International Center
under company management ”AD, against order He RD-15-176 / 8.06.
2000 of the District Governor of Sofia District for the seizure of
Bistritsa training base. As a basis for the order it is stated that
by virtue of 6 6 of the RZDPZ the term of the right of use has expired,
established by contract of 6 April 1990. Under that contract
the right of use has been ceded for a period of 50 years, as
the company has paid its price in the amount of the value of
the base (BGN 6,078,000 as of the date of concluding the contract).

As in the appeal to the Supreme Administrative Court
pointed out, we consider that the provision of 6 6 IZRZDS contradicts
Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. By supporting the others
grounds for unconstitutionality, as well as for non-compliance with
an international agreement to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party,
developed in the act by which the Constitutional Court was seised, this
reason is most related to
unconstitutional ' consequences of “the action of
provisions which directly affect constitutionally established and
guaranteed rights of the company. “(Evidence 9 for
the circumstances of the present case set out herein
opinion are contained in the attached adm. case He 4918/2000)

As a property right of property law, the right of
use unconditionally enjoys the constitutional protection of
property rights. This obvious situation with and explicitly
formulated by the Constitutional Court, which in the reasons
of decision Ho 22 of 10 December 1996 under cd. Ho 24/1996 e
noted that “private property of legal entities is
inviolable ”. The same decision that was made on the occasion
the declaration of a private receivable as state property continues
further, pointing out that “it (i.e. the claim) may be
forcibly expropriated, but only the conditions of art. 17, para 5 of
The Constitution - the presence of state needs that can not
be satisfied otherwise and after advance and
equivalent compensation.

The application of the 10-year term under Art. 56, para. VAT on
in respect of a right of use established for remuneration and under
the established order before the entry into force of this law for a period of 50
years, defines as the unequivocal purpose and effect of the disputed
legal provision its alienating effect. Of course, because
the nature of the legal provision, its effect is general and
extends to an indefinite number of cases. that's why
the circumstances of the present case are pointed out here only for the purpose of
stand out (and explain) Her real action on the occasion of one

actual, not a hypothetical legal relationship. It's different
the question that this action as such determines its
unconstitutionality in general, and not only for
the needs of the particular case.

In fact, it is the general effect of the law (respectively
the legal provision in question) as intended
legislative act with alienating effect (in the sense and in the expression of
the said decision Ho 22 under cd. X 26/1996) puts it in
contradiction with art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution. As
the alienating effect occurs as a direct result of the application
of the law itself, i.e. of a general norm, as such it according to
definition - given its content - can not fulfill
the requirements of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution - a provision which under
the words of the Constitutional Court ”contains the criteria under which it is
constitutionally permissible property rights belonging to
individuals to be prejudiced to an extent that includes
and their alienation from the state ”(decision He 17 of 16 December
ро уу ллиииии лии ик

Even assuming that the state is not limited by
The Constitution, when it regulates the conditions under which it is ordered
with the properties - private state property, including in which
establishes the right of use on such property - an understanding that
here it is at first disputed when it comes to alienation, “the important one
limiter ”, which is the provision of art. 17, para 5 (under Art
the expression of decision Ho 17 under cd. Ho 14/1999), of course
continues to operate No> there are considerations from
constitutional order to repeal it. That's exactly what it is
consists of the constitutional protection of property. It is clear that
The Constitution allows in principle - in Article 17, paragraph 5 - such an impact
(restriction) of the right of ownership (of the right of private
property) by the state, which may reach a degree
and forced expropriation. But it is also clear that such
“Deprivation of possession” (according to the successful expression of art. 1, 51, sentence 2
of the Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights
of man) can be done only on the basis of law and in compliance
of the other conditions provided in this constitutional text.
(The expropriation effect that occurs as a result of
premature termination of a contract for assignment of a right
of use for a certain period, unconditionally constitutes “deprivation of
possession ”ie this meaning is obvious.)

The provision of 6 6 MANPADS does not meet the requirements
of the constitutional norm and is not a "law" in the sense referred to by
her.

It does not contain those prerequisites for its application,
to serve as a basis for alienation in each individual
such as the specification of the need for expropriation -
in view of the condition that it cannot be satisfied in another way
way, as well as the determination of advance and equivalent
compensation, which is a condition that must precede itself
expropriation. By the way, given the effect of the contested
provision, its expropriation effect occurs by itself, p
its entry into force without it being possible to take into account the specifics of
individual cases, respectively to determine which compensation is
appears "equal" in each of them. In this regard, it should
the understanding is also taken into account (expressed in connection with art. 30 of the Law
for cultural monuments and museums - respectively on the occasion of
decision Ho 5 of 21 March 1996 under c.d. He 4/1996), according to which no
it is necessary for each (alienating) law to reproduce accurately
17, para 5 of the Constitution, and it is enough to refer to
the established procedure for expropriation of state and municipal properties
needs. In the present case, however, the contested provision is completely ignored
its alienating action, as if it did not exist. She does not
provides for no "individualization" of the case to take into account
constitutional conditions - and in terms of the specific need and
the impossibility of satisfying it in any other way, and from a point of view
of the preliminary equivalent compensation.

2. From our point of view, the next in importance
unconstitutional (from the point of view of
the sequence of their exposition here, not as gradation
of their gravity) is a violation of the principle of legal
state, proclaimed in art. 4, para 1.

The provision of 5 6 MANPADS does not meet the requirements for
quality of the law from the point of view of this constitutional one as well
principle.

In one of its decisions - Ho 9 of June 20, 1996 under k, d. He 9/1996
d- although in another, specific context, the Constitutional Court is
constitutionalized the norm of art. 14, para 3 of the LNA, having interpreted
the prohibition of retroactive effect of laws as a general constitutional one
principle of Bulgarian law, as a manifestation of the principles of
rule of law and legality.

Also in terms of the situation in which he finds himself
our company have special relevance
the considerations developed in the request in relation to the contradiction with
Art. 4, para of the Constitution, on the plane of the possible ones
considerations of the legislator that may justify such
legislative approach.

Maintaining that such do not exist in principle, you are
we allow the Constitutional Court to draw attention to
Hobot decision of 25 February 1997 under c.d. Ho 32/1996 (SG, issue 21
since 1997). In the grounds of that judgment, the court, on the one hand,
he has exhaustively indicated the provisions of the Constitution itself
hypotheses in which the legislator is given the right to settle,
respectively to restrict the freedom of economic initiative under
legislative order and, on the other hand, has formulated the principle that
free business initiative can always be limited to
view the protection of other constitutional values ​​(which are also
none of the hypotheses in question,
respectively other constitutional values ​​cannot justify
constitutional level state intervention by legislative
way in a certified legal relationship in which she is a party in her capacity
of an equal subject, and not as a bearer of power
powers.

Even if it is assumed that the basis of the dispute
legislative permission lie any considerations for
liquidation of cases of unjustified transfers of goods or
in general of expediency, as presupposed by
the panel seised by the Constitutional Court remains unresolved
the issue of compensation of state counterparties for
the actual harms and lost profits suffered by them in
as a result of the early termination of valid contracts,
concluded with the state on the basis of trust in the current
their conclusion legal and legitimate (ie on the basis of
Constitution) expectations for the stability of the legal order. That's right
with the inadmissibility through a special law to be rearranged economically
relations to the detriment of the constitutionally guaranteed rights of
economic operators, which derives from the principle of legal
state, the requirement for> fairness reappears
(“Preliminary and equivalent”) compensation. Individual cases do not
are hypothetical and concrete. Such is the case that gave rise to
referral to the Constitutional Court, in which the term for which it is
ceded the right of use is adequate to the paid (in
April 1990) price, so there is an equivalence that is
violated by the termination of the legal relationship long before
the expiration of the term.

3. By the way, we find that all these issues,
including all the grounds before the Constitutional Court
for unconstitutionality, has been successfully united - given and
of the connection between the separate grounds - in decision Ho 17 under c.d. Ho
14/1999. It remains to be cited from the grounds of that decision

an emphasis on it, based on a reference to a decision rendered
in 1993: "It is the duty of the state to guarantee and protect
the inviolability of private property by law | and is |
it is inadmissible to encroach on this in a legislative way
inviolability ”.

4. In view of the current practice of the Constitutional Court,
and in view of the existence of compelling reasons for
establishing the unconstitutionality of the provision of 6 6
MANPADS, “the ruling on this request makes it irrelevant
the assessment under Art. 149, para 1, item 4 of the Constitution.

In this way, the Constitutional Court has acted, for example,
on cd. Ho 13/1997, under c.d. Ho 6/1998 and under cd. Ho 4/1999, but
there are also examples in which the court has ruled on the latter
request - decision Ho 2 of 21 January 1999 under c.d. X 33/1998

By maintaining that the request is well-founded on the board
of the non-compliance of 6 6 of the RZDP with Art from the Extra
Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights and that
a declaratory decision in this sense would increase the authority
of the act of the Constitutional Court, at the same time we note that for
the needs of the proceedings under Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution,
the consequences of declaring the provision for
unconstitutional, arising from the action of art. 151, para 2,
sentence 3 of the Constitution are sufficient.

For these reasons, we state once again that the request is
reasonably and please respect it.
Dear Constitutional Judges,

The Gisdi Association considers the request to declare
unconstitutionality of the provision of art. 7, para 2 proposal second and
Article 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament as justified.
The challenged provisions contradict Art. 6, para 2 and art. 10 from
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. Our motives are the following:

1. The provisions adopted shall, in substance, establish a property qualification for
participation in the elections for the parties, coalitions and independent candidates, p
which violates passive suffrage, especially with regard to
independent candidates and small parties. To raise money for
ballot printing parties will have two possible options:

A) to tax their members with additional membership fees, which
means the introduction of "tax newsletters" and automatically means that part of
voters will actually pay for the right to vote
unequal as the amount for each party or coalition participating in
The elections will be the same, but for small parties and coalitions this price will increase
distributes to fewer voters and respectively to the individual voter
becomes times higher.

or

B) to accept "donations" from sponsors, which automatically puts them in
the position to depend on them in their eventual entry into power and
leads to the promotion of "clientelism" among players in political life
in the country.

The adopted provisions put the parties with
large membership and small parties, as well as the parties in power and those in
opposition. The amount that each party must pay - large or
small, in power or in opposition is the same, which immediately puts
the ability of parties to participate in elections depending on theirs
financial resources. On this basis, privileges are created for the big ones
players in the political life of the country, as only they will be able to
pay the required amount relatively easily. Although at the beginning of
the election race will have a large number of registered to participate in
elections parties and coalitions, their actual number will be reduced
significantly after 31 days before the election, the CEC canceled the registration of
parties that did not pay for the printing of their ballots. Violates
the principle of equality before the law, in this case the lack of
finance is an obstacle to the free formation of political will
of the citizens of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Particularly unsuccessful is articulated art. 76 para
production of the ballots are announced by the Council of Ministers ... ”. This suggests one thing
non-market formation of the price of the ballots and may create conditions
for a kind of racketeering by the executive. It is not recorded that
the printing of the ballots is the subject of a public procurement. Its possible
to form an arbitrarily high price of ballots, which will refuse
many of the participants in the political process and will create conditions for
corruption not only at the personal level, but rather at the leadership level of
the ruling party with the subsequent inclusion of these funds in

the election campaign.


B) to accept "donations" from sponsors, which automatically puts them in
the position to depend on them in their eventual entry into power and
leads to the promotion of "clientelism" among players in political life
in the country.

The adopted provisions put the parties with
large membership and small parties, as well as the parties in power and those in
opposition. The amount that each party must pay - large or
small, in power or in opposition is the same, which immediately puts
the ability of parties to participate in elections depending on theirs
financial resources. On this basis, privileges are created for the big ones
players in the political life of the country, as only they will be able to
pay the required amount relatively easily. Although at the beginning of
the election race will have a large number of registered to participate in
elections parties and coalitions, their actual number will be reduced
significantly after 31 days before the election, the CEC canceled the registration of
parties that did not pay for the printing of their ballots. Violates
the principle of equality before the law, in this case the lack of
finance is an obstacle to the free formation of political will
of the citizens of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Particularly unsuccessful is articulated art. 76 para
production of the ballots are announced by the Council of Ministers ... ”. This suggests one thing
non-market formation of the price of the ballots and may create conditions
for a kind of racketeering by the executive. It is not recorded that
the printing of the ballots is the subject of a public procurement. Its possible
to form an arbitrarily high price of ballots, which will refuse
many of the participants in the political process and will create conditions for
corruption not only at the personal level, but rather at the leadership level of
the ruling party with the subsequent inclusion of these funds in

the election campaign.
Dissenting opinion of Judge Nedelcho BeronovI signed Decision № 8 of 3 May 2001 under c.d. № 10/2001 with a special opinion, because I consider that Art. 7, para 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP), promulgated, SG, issue 37 of 13 April 2001. , are not unconstitutional in their disputed part. The holding of elections for the National Assembly is related to expenses, part of which are borne by the candidates for MPs, without being disputed - for travel, posters, advertisements, etc. campaign materials, for rent of premises, for pre-election programs on BNR and BNT and their regional centers (art. 68 ZINP), etc. At the expense of the state budget are the costs of the organizational part - for the preparation and conduct of elections. The election campaign is funded by candidates and through donations that they receive under the undisputed Articles 71 and 72 of the Law on Elections. These costs are also a property barrier for the candidates, but there is no request for the texts governing them to be declared unconstitutional, although the arguments against the challenged provisions can be put forward with the same conviction for the indicated costs. The question of who will bear the costs of producing the ballots does not have a direct answer in the Constitution. Each of the two possible solutions will be tailored to it. The assessment is left to the legislator. The disputed provisions do not contradict Article 10 of the Constitution, according to which elections are held on the basis of universal equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The common suffrage, as historically formed, ensures the participation in the elections of all politically capable persons according to Article 42 of the Constitution. The vote of each voter is equal, exercised personally and secretly. The impugned provisions do not affect any of the elements of active suffrage. Requiring the costs of ballot production to be borne by the candidates does not burden those who have the support and political will of a sufficient number of voters and are therefore able to take responsibility for their possible participation in governing the country. Candidates who do not represent a significant enough number of voters and therefore fail to cross the percentage barrier will not be represented in parliament, and the votes cast for them are subject to redistribution and will benefit other candidates for whom they were not cast. Avoiding this possibility, or at least limiting it, actually supports active suffrage, as well as passive suffrage, because the election will involve candidates backed by a sufficient number of voters with serious intentions and real opportunities. In all elections held under the Constitution of the Republic Bulgaria, the requirement adopted by more countries to distribute mandates to participate only candidates who have received not less than the statutory percentage of actual votes. The so-called percentage barrier raises the same questions that the petitioners point to as a violation of the constitutional provisions relating to citizens' voting rights and political pluralism. However, the percentage barrier has not been challenged in the present case, nor has it been done so far. The principle of political pluralism proclaimed in Article 11 of the Constitution is not violated by the challenged provisions. They are not aimed at creating a monopoly on political power by one party. whose role should be leading in the state, as it was with art. 1, para 2 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria from 1971, in contrast to which art. 11 of the current Constitution has been created. The disputed provisions presuppose the participation in the elections of several times more political parties than those that will manage to get parliamentary representation. The disputed provisions put all candidates for MPs under equal conditions, therefore Article 6 of the Constitution is not violated. In principle, this constitutional provision applies to citizens, but not to legal entities such as political parties. This follows from the wording of the provision. The opposite is not supported in Interpretative Decision № 14/1992 under c.d. № 14/1992
Dissenting opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev I signed the decision with a dissenting opinion on the following grounds. on the production of ballot papers not to be at the expense of the state budget and Article 76 of the same law, the provisions of which establish that these expenses should be paid by the political parties participating in the elections and independent candidates for MPs indicate that these legal texts contradict art. 42, art. 11 in connection with art. 6, para 2, art. 4, para 2 and the preamble of the Constitution. The decision of the Constitutional Court assumes that the contradictions are with art. 10 and art. 11 of it. The question of who should pay the expenses for the production of the ballots and that this should weigh on the state is not settled either in the preamble or in any of the be of the provisions of the Constitution. Article 42, paragraph 2 of it stipulates that the organization and procedure for holding elections and referendums shall be determined by law. Therefore, the Constitution has delegated to the legislator the right to determine how the elections will be organized and the procedure for their holding. In fact, the financial burden is not essentially part of the organization itself. And as I pointed out, there are no constitutional provisions for it. It is true that in the current practice of holding elections, the costs of preparing the ballots were borne by the state, but this was because the relevant laws did not provide otherwise. The challenged law does not violate any of the constitutional provisions, which are indicated both in the reasons of the decision and in the request addressed to the Constitutional Court. The preamble of the Constitution obviously does not contain provisions in this direction. The creation of a democratic, legal and social state, as proclaimed in this preamble, does not oblige it to pay the costs incurred by each party in participating in the elections. And the payment for printing the ballots is the smallest expense that the parties incur in connection with their participation. Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, to which the applicants refer, establishes the equality of citizens before the law and prohibits any privileges, including property status. Obviously it applies to individuals. There would be a contradiction with the provision if the law provided for the obligation to pay the costs of producing the ballots only for some of the independent candidates. However, the law obliges all those who participate in the elections to bear these costs. It is true that some parties have greater and others smaller financial opportunities. But in order to allow everyone to participate, it is unacceptable to create a rule for the state to pay only those who have fewer opportunities and to leave the parties with greater opportunities to pay for their own ballots. The impugned provision establishes equality for all parties and independent candidates. Article 4 para. 2 of the Constitution, to which the petitioners refer, also does not create an obligation for the state to bear all election costs and in particular the costs of ballot production. Its obligation to create conditions for the free development of man and civil society is fulfilled through the creation of legislation and its implementation, which would allow for free will and participation in the structures of society. However, they do not go so far as to finance each of these structures. It has nothing to do with the attacked provisions of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament and Article 10 of the Constitution, on which the constitutional decision is based. The raised principle of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot applies to active suffrage, to the right to vote. The text has its historical origins and its meaning is that all citizens of a country who have reached a certain physical and spiritual maturity, who are not legally deprived of the right to vote, have the right to vote. Each of them has one voice to speak directly and personally, not through a representative, and to give it secretly. The text does not even affect who has the right to be elected. The passive suffrage is defined in Article 42, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and here the claimants wrongly claim that it has been violated. Paragraph 1 defines the circle of citizens who can be elected, and paragraph 2, as I have already indicated, provides for the organization and procedure for holding elections to be determined by law. Here, too, the constitutional legislator does not speak about the obligations of the state in connection with the costs of holding elections. It is wrongly stated in the decision that the political pluralism proclaimed in Article 11 of the Constitution is violated by the representatives. Pluralism is realized through the legal possibility of each of the parties to exist and participate in elections. However, there is no provision in the Constitution that obliges the state to provide economic conditions for the existence of as many parties as they wish to participate in political life. Even in countries where the state funds political parties for their existence or participation in elections, this does not apply to all existing parties, but only to some. Parties that are represented in parliament or that had at least a minimum percentage in previous elections are usually funded. In this sense are the directives on the financing of political parties, adopted by the European Commission for Democracy through Law in Venice.
OPINION
OF THE BULGARIAN HELSINKI COMMITTEE

on Constitutional Case Ho 10, 2001

In his request to the Constitutional Court under k. e. Ho 10/2001 group
MPs want to declare themselves unconstitutional
the provisions of art. 7, para 2 and of art. 76 of the newly adopted Law on the Election of
members of parliament. With these two provisions from the parties, coalitions and
independent applicants are required to pay for the printing of the complete set
ballots for the parliamentary elections. It is alleged that the landing of such
financial burden (BGN 100,000 for parties and coalitions and BGN 2,000 - 4,000 for
independent candidates) is impossible for small parties and independents
candidates, which would lead to their dropping out of the political process and, ultimately
after all, to deprive voters of the opportunity to exercise theirs
the right to prefer certain political messages. This, according to the request,
violates the provisions of Art. 421, art. 112, art. 6, para 2? and Article 4, paragraph 24 of
The Constitution.

1. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 42 of the Constitution

The provision of Art. 42 guarantees the right of citizens, with the exception
of those under the age of 18, those placed under guardianship and those suffering
imprisonment, to elect state and local authorities.
power and participate in referendums. There is no doubt that this right can
violated if, for one reason or another, the subjects of the political process,
parties, coalitions and independent candidates disappeared from the political.

1 Art. 42 of the Constitution reads: “(1) Citizens who have reached the age of 18, with the exception of.
those placed under guardianship and serving a sentence of imprisonment have the right to
elect state and local bodies and participate in public consultations.

(2) The organization and the procedure for holding elections and referendums shall be determined by law. ”
2 Art. Under the Constitution, insofar as the justification of the request alleges relevance to
the present case reads: “(1) The political life in the Republic of Bulgaria is based on
the principle of political pluralism ... (3) The parties shall promote the formation and expression of.
the political will of the citizens. The procedure for the formation and termination of political parties,
as well as the conditions for their activity shall be regulated by law. ”

3 Art. B, para. 2 of the Constitution reads: “All citizens are equal before the law. Not allowed
no restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political affiliation,
personal and social status or property status. "

4 Art. 4, para 2 of the Constitution reads: “The Republic of Bulgaria guarantees life, dignity and
the rights of the individual and creates conditions for the free development of man and of the civil
community."

 

stage or severely limited, to the point of depriving them of the opportunity to exercise
of political choice a large number of voters. There is also no doubt
that the imposition on parties, coalitions and independent voters of one
an unbearable financial burden would contribute to this.

In this regard, the Constitutional Court must carefully assess
the specific dimensions of the financial burden that the printing of ballots
at its own expense it would be for the parties. However, it should be noted that
participation in the political process is in principle costly
parties, coalitions and independent candidates. The election campaign ev
the essence of a political marketing, which, like any other marketing,
burdens financially political actors. We need money for travel expenses,
posters, radio and television advertising, rental of premises, etc. Without all this
it is difficult to imagine an adequate pre-election political event going
beyond simple media self - promotion for
satisfying one's own pride. The issue of coverage by the state and
those costs which are not currently covered may be placed on the same
manner and with the same persuasiveness as the issue of covering the costs of.
bulletins. The inability of parties, coalitions and independent candidates to
cover them is also able to remove them from the political process and yes.
restrict the political choice of Bulgarian citizens. However, you have to
noted that the financial support of parties, coalitions and independents
candidates comes from the state budget, that is, with the money that the state collects from
the voters themselves. It is clear that the parties, coalitions and independents
Applicants are interested in being financially supported, it is not clear whether and
the extent to which voters want to support political entities with questionable
viability.

The Law on the Election of Members of Parliament provides for others
restrictions on parties, coalitions and independent candidates. One such
a limitation is the electoral system itself. With Art. 6, para 3 of the Law for election of
MPs set a 4 percent barrier for parties such as
provided that they participate in the distribution of mandates. To overcome it
need to mobilize large human and financial resources. It's hard to
believe that a party or coalition that can not raise money to pay
ballots, will be able to overcome such a serious barrier whose
constitutionality is not disputed. With Art. 68 of the law, whose
constitutionality is not disputed, parties, coalitions and
the initiative committees to pay for the election broadcasts in Bulgaria
national television and the Bulgarian National Radio and their regional ones
centers at a rate set by the Council of Ministers. In regard to
the independent candidates with art. 46 of the law is required of independent candidates in
multi-member constituencies to secure the written support of
a certain number of voters. Recruitment is also required to recruit them
human and financial resources.

The assessment of the extent to which the state should support financially
parties, coalitions and independent candidates must balance between
guaranteeing the right of citizens to elect their representatives and its

an obligation to be a good manager and to spend the resources he or she has
disposal in the interest of the citizens. The latter obligation shall be imposed on
the state with a number of constitutional and legislative provisions. ? Maintenance
of this balance the Constitution leaves largely to the discretion of
legislator. There is no more specific instruction in this direction in Art. 42 or in others
constitutional texts.

Given the above, it is difficult to see a violation of this balance
requiring parties, coalitions and independent candidates to pay
the printing of the full set of ballots for the parliamentary elections.
Therefore, the provisions of Art. 7, para 2 and of art. 76 of
the newly adopted Law on the Election of Members of Parliament to be declared for
contrary to Art. 42 of the Constitution.

Q. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 11 of the Constitution

The provision of Art. 11, para. | requires political life in the Republic
Bulgaria to be based on the principle of political pluralism. On each
probability requirement parties, coalitions and independent candidates to.
pay their ballots would make it difficult or completely hinder participation
of some of them in the election campaign. The political process in each
however, a democratic society imposes certain restrictions on the political
choice of citizens. This stems from its very nature of a process in which
a large group of people, each with their own unique beliefs, choose another,
a smaller group of people to represent them. With this, the voters have to
to compromise and to judge against the background of the available alternatives.
The Law on the Election of Members of Parliament requires additional ones
restrictions, such as the 4% barrier, whose
constitutionality is not disputed. This further narrows the spectrum of
political alternatives and the need for voters to compromise.
The practice in modern democracies in this regard is diverse. In some
of which restrictions, including electoral barriers and requirements for
self-financing are even more restrictive. On the other hand, the Constitution does not
determines the minimum number of political entities without which to achieve
the principle of political pluralism would be violated. It is therefore difficult to
there is an encroachment on the principle of political pluralism, which
violates the provision of Art. 11, para. | of the Constitution and the adopted standards
of modern democratic societies.

Sh. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution
Art. 6, para 2 proclaims equality before the law and prohibits

discrimination based on wealth. First of all it should be
noted that Art. 6, para 2 proclaims the equality of the citizens before the law and

prohibits discrimination on the grounds provided for in the Constitution, under
attitude of the citizens. Decision He14 / 10.11.1992 of the Constitutional Court, p
which is interpreted this provision does not give reason to assume that the court is
tends to extend its scope to legal entities such as
represent political parties or associations of legal entities,
as the coalitions represent. But even if this were possible, it is not clear with
what the provisions of Art. 7, para. 2 art. 76 of the People's Election Act
representatives violate the principle of non - discrimination on the basis of
property status, as claimed in the request of the group of people
representatives. In this case there can be no direct discrimination as
the wording of both texts in the law applies to all parties, coalitions
and independent candidates, without reference to property status. The ban on
however, discrimination applies to both direct and indirect (indirect)
discrimination. Indirect discrimination consists in the different effect that one
a generally applicable rule may apply to different groups of citizens or
legal entities to which it applies. The ban of this kind
However, discrimination is a very delicate issue as a general theoretical,
as well as from an international legal point of view. In any case, this ban does not
implies a ban on some citizens or legal entities being poorer, a.
others - richer. There is a difference in property status between everyone
political parties, and covering the cost of ballots would be different
degree of burden for the different ones. But the Constitutional Court would go too far
far if he interprets this circumstance as contrary to the principle of
equality before the law and non-discrimination.

 

. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 4, para. 2 of the Constitution

Art. 4, para. 2 requires the Republic of Bulgaria to create conditions for freedom
human development and civil society. This is one too general
a formulated provision that contains several terms that are not defined
neither in the Constitution nor in other laws. Their more precise definition probably
will reveal that in the Republic of Bulgaria there are laws and practices that
constitute an obstacle to human and civil free development
community. However, the refusal of the state to pay the ballots is unlikely
of parties, coalitions and independent candidates is the most serious of them.
Freedom and civil society can thrive in political systems,
in which all parties, coalitions and independent candidates pay their own
ballots and, conversely, be severely suppressed in systems that pay not only
the ballots, but also all other expenses for the "elections" of the candidates. Bright
An example of the latter was the political system of our country until recently
more than 11 years. At this point, the request of the group of MPs is
completely unfounded.

CONCLUSION: The request of the group of MPs to announce
the unconstitutionality of Art. 7, para. 2 and of Art. 76 of the Election Act
MPs should be rejected.


to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION

from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria

on
constitutional case Ke 10 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of April 19, 2001, we are
constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case Ke 10
for 2001, formed at the request of 61 MPs from the 38th
National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art.
7, para. 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament
(зЗинП).

The request of the group of MPs claims that Art. 7,
al. 2 art. 76 of the ZINP, according to which the costs of production of
the ballots are at the expense of the parties, coalitions and
the independent candidates participating in the elections contradict Art. 42
and Art. 11 in connection with Art. 6, para. 2, Art. 4, para. 2 and the preamble of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, taken in their mutual connection,
as they introduced a barrier to the exercise of both active and
of the passive suffrage of citizens depending on theirs
property status. This follows from the fact that the probable according to

the group of MPs amount required to participate in
elections would be “impossible for the participation of relatively small,
newly formed or simply poor parties ", as a result of which
their candidates were deprived of their passive suffrage, a
their supporters - from their active suffrage.

Indeed, as stated in the request, the Constitution is binding
the state by law and under conditions of equality before it to
guarantees not only the participation of eligible citizens, but also
the free formation and exercise of their political will.
However, this does not mean that the state is obliged to provide unconditionally
opportunity for anyone with the right to vote to be able to vote for
everyone who has the right to be elected. On the contrary, it means
only that the state must create equal and equal conditions
for all participants in the electoral process, guaranteeing freedom
exercising the right to vote and expressing the political will of
side of the electorate and the willingness to take responsibility for
the government of the country by political parties,
coalitions and independent candidates.

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria does not contain a regulation
in connection with the organization and conduct of the elections, and shall be forwarded
to the law. Therefore, the power to establish a comprehensive regulation of
the organization and conduct of the elections, as follows from the explicit ones
texts of art. 42, para. 2, Art. 93, para. 1, art. 138, Art. 139, para. 1 of
The Constitution is given to the legislator. They are part of this system
and the conditions and requirements that must be met for registration
of candidates for participation in the elections. The constitutionality of
the requirements introduced by law should be assessed in the light of
constitutional principles and norms for political pluralism and
equality, but the specific content of the framework within
constitutional "requirements is a matter of" legislative
expediency.

In this case, the requirement to pay production costs
of ballots is only one of the requirements for political parties and
coalitions and independent candidates nominated by the initiative

committees for participation in the elections and it cannot be considered
separate from them. According to Art. 43 et seq. Of ZINP candidacies for popular
representatives can nominate political parties, coalitions and
initiative committees which meet the conditions laid down in
ZINP and in the Law on Political Parties, not every citizen who
has the right to choose. The PDO also sets deadlines and procedures,
which must be met in order for the candidates nominated by
parties, coalitions and initiative committees to take part in
elections.

The purpose of these legal requirements, which are not disputed by
group of MPs, is to provide an opportunity to participate in
the election of organizations and candidates who express the political
will of a sufficient number of voters and who are able to take over
responsibility for its possible participation in the government of the country.
The purpose of the requirement to pay the costs for
production of ballots by parties, coalitions and independents
candidates. That is why the meaning of this requirement can not
be defined as the introduction of a property qualification in contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as alleged in the group's request
people's> representatives. "On the contrary, it> guarantees that
political parties, coalitions and independent candidates are concerned
responsible for their participation in the elections and for their future in the future
participation in the governance of the country and are ready to share with
the state is responsible for conducting the elections by taking over
part of the costs for their own participation in them. There is no contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as on the one hand the addressee of
the obligation to pay the costs of production of
the ballots under Art. 7, para. 2 and under Art. 76 of the ZINP are not the citizens, but
political parties, coalitions and those supported by initiative parties
committees independent candidates, and on the other hand, this requirement applies to
equal degree for all participants in the elections who wish to
nominated candidates and does not create inequalities and privileges
only for some of them.

We do not share the opinion of the group of MPs that
thus limiting active and passive voting
right. On the contrary, this requirement, like all others provided in
legal requirements for parties, coalitions and initiative committees,
are aimed at protecting the right to vote. They defend
active suffrage because, on the one hand, they create guarantees
for voters that serious elections are allowed to participate in the elections
political formations and independent candidates who express
the political will of a sufficient number of voters, on the other hand,
limit the redistribution of votes to voters
to parties for which they have not been submitted, in the cases under Art. 108, para. 1 of
ZINP. They also defend passive suffrage as they create
guarantees for MP candidates that their
candidacies and political positions are supported by political
formations or by a sufficient number of voters with serious intentions
and real opportunities for participation in the governance of the country.

In this regard, it should be borne in mind that all others
costs of organizing and conducting the elections shall be borne by
the state budget, the main source of revenue for which are paid by
voters taxes. If the cost of producing the ballots does not
are taken over by parties, coalitions and independent candidates, the
in practice they will be borne by the voters. We do not consider all
voters should be required to pay to participate in
the election of organizations that do not have serious intentions and
opportunities for participation in the governance of the country and which in some
cases express mainly the leadership ambitions of their leaders, a
not the political will of the voters. After participating in the election
of political parties and coalitions and independent candidates is an expression
of their willingness to take responsibility for participating in
governance of the country, the right of the legislator is to ask them to
prove their responsible attitude towards the state and towards
the elections, bearing part of the costs of their participation.

The statement in the request that the determination of
the cost of printing the ballots shall be borne by

The Council of Ministers, without a legal framework. According to Art.
76, para. 3 of the ZINP, the Council of Ministers announces the costs for
the production of the ballots and does not determine them. Hence the law
authorizes the Council of Ministers only to disclose the actual ones
costs it will incur for the production of the ballots, a
their determination will be done by negotiating with the contractors at
the terms and conditions of the current legislation and in particular
under the terms and conditions of the Public Procurement Act.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 7,
al. 2 and of art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament is
unfounded and should be rejected. 7
to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION

from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria

on
constitutional case Ke 10 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of April 19, 2001, we are
constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case Ke 10
for 2001, formed at the request of 61 MPs from the 38th
National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art.
7, para. 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament
(зЗинП).

The request of the group of MPs claims that Art. 7,
al. 2 art. 76 of the ZINP, according to which the costs of production of
the ballots are at the expense of the parties, coalitions and
the independent candidates participating in the elections contradict Art. 42
and Art. 11 in connection with Art. 6, para. 2, Art. 4, para. 2 and the preamble of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, taken in their mutual connection,
as they introduced a barrier to the exercise of both active and
of the passive suffrage of citizens depending on theirs
property status. This follows from the fact that the probable according to

the group of MPs amount required to participate in
elections would be “impossible for the participation of relatively small,
newly formed or simply poor parties ", as a result of which
their candidates were deprived of their passive suffrage, a
their supporters - from their active suffrage.

Indeed, as stated in the request, the Constitution is binding
the state by law and under conditions of equality before it to
guarantees not only the participation of eligible citizens, but also
the free formation and exercise of their political will.
However, this does not mean that the state is obliged to provide unconditionally
opportunity for anyone with the right to vote to be able to vote for
everyone who has the right to be elected. On the contrary, it means
only that the state must create equal and equal conditions
for all participants in the electoral process, guaranteeing freedom
exercising the right to vote and expressing the political will of
side of the electorate and the willingness to take responsibility for
the government of the country by political parties,
coalitions and independent candidates.

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria does not contain a regulation
in connection with the organization and conduct of the elections, and shall be forwarded
to the law. Therefore, the power to establish a comprehensive regulation of
the organization and conduct of the elections, as follows from the explicit ones
texts of art. 42, para. 2, Art. 93, para. 1, art. 138, Art. 139, para. 1 of
The Constitution is given to the legislator. They are part of this system
and the conditions and requirements that must be met for registration
of candidates for participation in the elections. The constitutionality of
the requirements introduced by law should be assessed in the light of
constitutional principles and norms for political pluralism and
equality, but the specific content of the framework within
constitutional "requirements is a matter of" legislative
expediency.

In this case, the requirement to pay production costs
of ballots is only one of the requirements for political parties and
coalitions and independent candidates nominated by the initiative

committees for participation in the elections and it cannot be considered
separate from them. According to Art. 43 et seq. Of ZINP candidacies for popular
representatives can nominate political parties, coalitions and
initiative committees which meet the conditions laid down in
ZINP and in the Law on Political Parties, not every citizen who
has the right to choose. The PDO also sets deadlines and procedures,
which must be met in order for the candidates nominated by
parties, coalitions and initiative committees to take part in
elections.

The purpose of these legal requirements, which are not disputed by
group of MPs, is to provide an opportunity to participate in
the election of organizations and candidates who express the political
will of a sufficient number of voters and who are able to take over
responsibility for its possible participation in the government of the country.
The purpose of the requirement to pay the costs for
production of ballots by parties, coalitions and independents
candidates. That is why the meaning of this requirement can not
be defined as the introduction of a property qualification in contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as alleged in the group's request
people's> representatives. "On the contrary, it> guarantees that
political parties, coalitions and independent candidates are concerned
responsible for their participation in the elections and for their future in the future
participation in the governance of the country and are ready to share with
the state is responsible for conducting the elections by taking over
part of the costs for their own participation in them. There is no contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as on the one hand the addressee of
the obligation to pay the costs of production of
the ballots under Art. 7, para. 2 and under Art. 76 of the ZINP are not the citizens, but
political parties, coalitions and those supported by initiative parties
committees independent candidates, and on the other hand, this requirement applies to
equal degree for all participants in the elections who wish to
nominated candidates and does not create inequalities and privileges
only for some of them.

We do not share the opinion of the group of MPs that
thus limiting active and passive voting
right. On the contrary, this requirement, like all others provided in
legal requirements for parties, coalitions and initiative committees,
are aimed at protecting the right to vote. They defend
active suffrage because, on the one hand, they create guarantees
for voters that serious participation in the elections is allowed
political formations and independent candidates who express
the political will of a sufficient number of voters, on the other hand,
limit the cases of redistribution of votes to voters
to parties for which they have not been submitted, in the cases under Art. 108, para. 1 of
ZINP. They also defend passive suffrage as they create
guarantees for MP candidates that their
candidacies and political positions are supported by political
formations or by a sufficient number of voters with serious intentions
and real opportunities for participation in the governance of the country.

In this regard, it should be borne in mind that all others
costs of organizing and conducting the elections shall be borne by
the state budget, the main source of revenue for which are paid by
voters taxes. If the cost of producing the ballots does not
are taken over by parties, coalitions and independent candidates, the
in practice they will be borne by the voters. We do not consider all
voters should be required to pay to participate in
the election of organizations that do not have serious intentions and
opportunities for participation in the governance of the country and which in some
cases express mainly the leadership ambitions of their leaders, a
not the political will of the voters. After participating in the election
of political parties and coalitions and independent candidates is an expression
of their willingness to take responsibility for participating in
governance of the country, the right of the legislator is to ask them to
prove their responsible attitude towards the state and towards
elections, bearing part of the costs of their participation.

The statement in the request that the determination of
the cost of printing the ballots shall be borne by

The Council of Ministers, without providing a legal framework. According to Art.
76, para. 3 of the ZINP, the Council of Ministers announces the costs for
the production of the ballots and does not determine them. Hence the law
authorizes the Council of Ministers only to disclose the actual ones
costs it will incur for the production of the ballots, a
their determination will be done by negotiating with the contractors at
the terms and conditions of the current legislation and in particular
under the terms and conditions of the Public Procurement Act.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 7,
al. 2 and of Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament is
unfounded and should be rejected. 7
to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION

from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria

on

constitutional case Mo 9 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of 19 April 2001, we were constituted as
interested party in constitutional case Mo 9 for 2001,
formed at the request of 50 MPs from the 38th National Assembly
meeting for obligatory interpretation of art. 65, para. 2 and Art. 68, para. 1 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

With the said ruling, the Constitutional Court allowed for
consideration on the merits of the request for interpretation of Art. 65, para. 2 of
The Constitution in the sense of “whether the Prime Minister, the Deputy
prime ministers and ministers hold public office under
the meaning of Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria ”.

As stated in the request of the group of MPs,
The Constitutional Court has already had occasion to express its opinion
on the meaning of the term "civil service" with which it is used

in the Constitution and in particular as to the meaning with which it is
used in Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution. In the reasons for Decision Mo.
Bot 1993 on constitutional case Me 6 for 1993 states:

“In the Constitution, apart from Art. 68, para. 1 for civil service
speaks in Art. 65, para. 2. The concept is the basis of the provision of art.
116. It is common ground that the term 'civil service' must be understood as
unified and consistent meaning. In general, this is an activity on
performing the functions of the state. This activity is performed
on behalf of the state and to exercise the powers provided for
in the Constitution its organs. "

The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in a Decision
Me 16 of 1997 on constitutional case Me 8 of 1997.

We fully share the opinion of the Constitutional Court
on the unified and uncontroversial meaning of the term “state
service ”as an activity for performing the functions of the state,
which is done on behalf of the state and for implementation
the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution. The activity,
which is carried out by the Prime Minister, the Deputy Minister
presidents and ministers as sole bodies of state power and
as members of the highest collegial body of the executive branch
it is indisputably an activity for the performance of the functions of the state which
they perform on behalf of the state and to exercise their powers
of its constitutional bodies. Therefore, they occupy the state
service within the meaning of the grounds of the decision of
The Constitutional Court. However, to determine whether occupied by them
civil service is included in the scope of the term "civil service" under
Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, it is necessary to assess not only
the nature of their activity, as well as the constitutional law
status of the Council of Ministers and its members. This also follows
of the reasons in the cited decision of the Constitutional Court, in which
says:

“.. in the absence of an unambiguous doctrinal or legal
definition of civil service the meaning and content of

22

the concept in individual cases must be disclosed in accordance with
the specific objectives of the regulations and the institutes to which it relates ...
However, this most general meaning of the term "civil service" does not exclude
and the peculiarities with which it is used in the Constitution and which it
acquires depending on its specific systematic place and from
the relevant legal institute with which it is directly related. Not possible
for example, to have an absolute coincidence in scope of the concept in Art. 68, para.
1 art. 116. The logical and systematic interpretation of the two texts
leads to the conclusion that in Art. 116 refers only to one type of state
service - in the field of executive power, the state
administration in the proper sense of the word. While in Art. 68, para. 1 is available
given the wider scope of the concept. (The discrepancy from the point of view of
volume does not mean a contradiction in the general sense of the term, it
expresses only the differences between the types of civil service). "

Clarification of the meaning of the term “civil service” under Art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution in view of the constitutional status of
The Council of Ministers and its members, regulated in Chapter Five of
The Constitution, in our opinion, imposes the conclusion that this concept does not include
the office of “Prime Minister,” Deputy 5 Minister-
presidents and ministers.

According to Chapter Five of the Constitution, ministers are sole proprietors
executive bodies, which are also members of
the collegial body of the executive power - the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers as a collegial body composed of
the President, the Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers,
manages and implements the domestic and foreign policy of the country,
ensures public order and national security, implements
the general management of the state administration and the Armed Forces,
directs the "implementation" of the state | budget, ”he organized
the management of the state property, concludes, approves and
denounce international treaties in the cases provided by law.

The members of the Council of Ministers receive their powers,

which the Constitution and laws connect only with them, through

their election by the National Assembly as provided for in the Constitution
ed. The Prime Minister is also a member of the Council of Ministers
directs and coordinates the general policy of the government and bears
responsibility for it, the deputy prime ministers and ministers are
members of the Council of Ministers and are responsible for their actions.
The powers of the Council of Ministers cannot be obtained in this way
to transfer to another. Ministers may, by order, delegate to
Deputy Ministers powers and determine their functions (Art.
26, para. 2 of the Administration Act), but they cannot delegate to them
powers which fall within their exclusive competence under
The Constitution and the laws. This applies above all to power
to be members of the Council of Ministers and to participate in the formation
at the will of the collegial body.

In view of the provisions of Chapter Five of the Constitution, if any
accept that in accordance with Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, the articles of
The Council of Ministers, which have registered to participate in the elections,
retain their powers but suspend their functions,
their constitutional and legal functions remain without a bearer in this
period of time and in practice will not be able to be implemented. If
more than half of the members of the Council of Ministers have
registered for participation in the elections, the government as a collegial body
he could not work and fulfill the tasks assigned to him by the Constitution
functions. And the functions that the Constitution assigns to the government,
are of a nature that does not allow them to be interrupted in any
moment. Apparently this conclusion is shared by the constitutional legislator,
who has created an explicit regulation in such a sense - Art. 111, para. 3 of
The Constitution provides that upon termination of the powers of
The Council of Ministers also resigns before the newly elected
National Assembly The Council of Ministers continues to implement
until the election of a new Council of Ministers. After
The Constitution does not allow interruption of the performance of the functions of
The Council of Ministers even in the event of terminated powers under
Art. 111 of the Constitution, there is no reason to claim that it does not

only allows, and even requires such an interruption, and during
the operation of the powers of the Council of Ministers, as is the case
under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution.

The constitutional requirement of Art. 65, para. 2 was played
incl. 49, para. 1 of the repealed Law on Election of Members of Parliament,
municipal councilors and mayors. By Decision of 13 September 1991 on
the legal status of the members of the Council of Ministers who registered
as candidates in parliamentary elections (SG, issue 80 of 1991)
The Grand National Assembly accepted that the provision of Art. 49, para. 1 of
ZINPOSK does not cover the Prime Minister, Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers and that their powers continue to
are also performed after the registration for participation in the elections
due to the special status of the Council of Ministers as a supreme central council
constitutional body of the executive power. In Decision Me 2 of 1991.
of the Constitutional Court in constitutional case Me 24 for 1991 on the occasion
this decision of the Grand National Assembly reads:

"In connection with the elections for MPs, municipal
councilors and mayors, held on October 13, 1991, the People's
meeting with a decision of 13 September 1991 reasonably accepted that Art. 49
ZINPOSK does not apply to the members of the Ministerial
advice if they participate in the election, as in view of the functions and
the responsibilities of its members the country cannot be left without
incumbent government. ”

The group of MPs have requested the Constitutional
court to rule on the interpretation of the terms "ministers" and
"Members of the Council of Ministers", "Council of Ministers" and "government".
We do not believe that these concepts are controversial in theory and practice.
Nevertheless, we note that in our opinion with the concept
"Government" means the supreme> collegial body of
the executive branch, as the name defined in the Constitution
of the Bulgarian government is the Council of Ministers. Members of
The Council of Ministers are the Prime Minister, the Deputy
the chairmen and the ministers according to art. 108, para. 1 of the Constitution,

which means that every minister is a member of the Council of Ministers, but not
each member of the Council of Ministers must be a minister insofar as
the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Ministers may also
not to be ministers.

Given the above, we believe that in the scope of the concept
"Civil service" under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution are not included
the ‘posts’ of the Prime Minister, 4 | Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers.

FOR THE PRIME MINISTER:

   


to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION

from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria

on

constitutional case Mo 9 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of 19 April 2001, we were constituted as
interested party in constitutional case Mo 9 for 2001,
formed at the request of 50 MPs from the 38th National Assembly
meeting for obligatory interpretation of art. 65, para. 2 and Art. 68, para. 1 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

With the said ruling, the Constitutional Court allowed for
consideration on the merits of the request for interpretation of Art. 65, para. 2 of
The Constitution in the sense of “whether the Prime Minister, the Deputy
prime ministers and ministers hold public office under
the meaning of Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria ”.

As stated in the request of the group of MPs,
The Constitutional Court has already had occasion to express its opinion
on the meaning of the term "civil service" with which it is used

in the Constitution and in particular as to the meaning with which it is
used in Art. 68, para. 1 of the Constitution. In the reasons for Decision Mo.
Bot 1993 on constitutional case Me 6 for 1993 states:

“In the Constitution, apart from Art. 68, para. 1 for civil service
speaks in Art. 65, para. 2. The concept is the basis of the provision of art.
116. It is common ground that the term 'civil service' must be understood as
unified and consistent meaning. In general, this is an activity on
performing the functions of the state. This activity is performed
on behalf of the state and to exercise the powers provided for
in the Constitution its organs. "

The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in a Decision
Me 16 of 1997 on constitutional case Me 8 of 1997.

We fully share the opinion of the Constitutional Court
on the unified and uncontroversial meaning of the term “state
service ”as an activity for performing the functions of the state,
which is done on behalf of the state and for implementation
the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution. The activity,
which is carried out by the Prime Minister, the Deputy Minister
presidents and ministers as sole bodies of state power and
as members of the highest collegial body of the executive branch
it is indisputably an activity for the performance of the functions of the state which
they perform on behalf of the state and to exercise their powers
of its constitutional bodies. Therefore, they occupy the state
service within the meaning of the grounds of the decision of
The Constitutional Court. However, to determine whether occupied by them
civil service is included in the scope of the term "civil service" under
Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, it is necessary to assess not only
the nature of their activity, as well as the constitutional law
status of the Council of Ministers and its members. This also follows
of the reasons in the cited decision of the Constitutional Court, in which
says:

“.. in the absence of an unambiguous doctrinal or legal
definition of civil service the meaning and content of

22

the concept in individual cases must be disclosed in accordance with
the specific objectives of the regulations and the institutes to which it relates ...
However, this most general meaning of the term "civil service" does not exclude
and the peculiarities with which it is used in the Constitution and which it
acquires depending on its specific systematic place and from
the relevant legal institute with which it is directly related. Not possible
for example, to have an absolute coincidence in scope of the concept in Art. 68, para.
1 art. 116. The logical and systematic interpretation of the two texts
leads to the conclusion that in Art. 116 refers only to one type of state
service - in the field of executive power, the state
administration in the proper sense of the word. While in Art. 68, para. 1 is available
given the wider scope of the concept. (The discrepancy from the point of view of
volume does not mean a contradiction in the general sense of the term, it
expresses only the differences between the types of civil service). "

Clarification of the meaning of the term “civil service” under Art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution in view of the constitutional status of
The Council of Ministers and its members, regulated in Chapter Five of
The Constitution, in our opinion, imposes the conclusion that this concept does not include
the office of “Prime Minister,” Deputy 5 Minister-
presidents and ministers.

According to Chapter Five of the Constitution, ministers are sole proprietors
executive bodies, which are also members of
the collegial body of the executive power - the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers as a collegial body composed of
the President, the Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers,
manages and implements the domestic and foreign policy of the country,
ensures public order and national security, implements
the general management of the state administration and the Armed Forces,
directs the "implementation" of the state | budget, ”he organized
the management of the state property, concludes, approves and
denounce international treaties in the cases provided by law.

The members of the Council of Ministers receive their powers,

which the Constitution and laws connect only with them, through

their election by the National Assembly as provided for in the Constitution
ed. The Prime Minister is also a member of the Council of Ministers
directs and coordinates the general policy of the government and bears
responsibility for it, the deputy prime ministers and ministers are
members of the Council of Ministers and are responsible for their actions.
The powers of the Council of Ministers cannot be obtained in this way
to transfer to another. Ministers may, by order, delegate to
Deputy Ministers powers and determine their functions (Art.
26, para. 2 of the Administration Act), but they cannot delegate to them
powers which fall within their exclusive competence under
The Constitution and the laws. This applies above all to power
to be members of the Council of Ministers and to participate in the formation
at the will of the collegial body.

In view of the provisions of Chapter Five of the Constitution, if any
accept that in accordance with Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, the articles of
The Council of Ministers, which have registered to participate in the elections,
retain their powers but suspend their functions,
their constitutional and legal functions remain without a bearer in this
period of time and in practice will not be able to be implemented. If
more than half of the members of the Council of Ministers have
registered for participation in the elections, the government as a collegial body
he could not work and fulfill the tasks assigned to him by the Constitution
functions. And the functions that the Constitution assigns to the government,
are of a nature that does not allow them to be interrupted in any
moment. Apparently this conclusion is shared by the constitutional legislator,
who has created an explicit regulation in such a sense - Art. 111, para. 3 of
The Constitution provides that upon termination of the powers of
The Council of Ministers also resigns before the newly elected
National Assembly The Council of Ministers continues to implement
until the election of a new Council of Ministers. After
The Constitution does not allow interruption of the performance of the functions of
The Council of Ministers even in the event of terminated powers under
Art. 111 of the Constitution, there is no reason to claim that it does not

only allows, and even requires such an interruption, and during
the operation of the powers of the Council of Ministers, as is the case
under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution.

The constitutional requirement of Art. 65, para. 2 was played
incl. 49, para. 1 of the repealed Law on Election of Members of Parliament,
municipal councilors and mayors. By Decision of 13 September 1991 on
the legal status of the members of the Council of Ministers who registered
as candidates in parliamentary elections (SG, issue 80 of 1991)
The Grand National Assembly accepted that the provision of Art. 49, para. 1 of
ZINPOSK does not cover the Prime Minister, Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers and that their powers continue to
are also performed after the registration for participation in the elections
due to the special status of the Council of Ministers as a supreme central council
constitutional body of the executive power. In Decision Me 2 of 1991.
of the Constitutional Court in constitutional case Me 24 for 1991 on the occasion
this decision of the Grand National Assembly reads:

"In connection with the elections for MPs, municipal
councilors and mayors, held on October 13, 1991, the People's
meeting with a decision of 13 September 1991 reasonably accepted that Art. 49
ZINPOSK does not apply to the members of the Ministerial
advice if they participate in the election, as in view of the functions and
the responsibilities of its members the country cannot be left without
incumbent government. ”

The group of MPs have requested the Constitutional
court to rule on the interpretation of the terms "ministers" and
"Members of the Council of Ministers", "Council of Ministers" and "government".
We do not believe that these concepts are controversial in theory and practice.
Nevertheless, we note that in our opinion with the concept
"Government" means the supreme> collegial body of
the executive branch, as the name defined in the Constitution
of the Bulgarian government is the Council of Ministers. Members of
The Council of Ministers are the Prime Minister, the Deputy
the chairmen and the ministers according to art. 108, para. 1 of the Constitution,

which means that every minister is a member of the Council of Ministers, but not
each member of the Council of Ministers must be a minister insofar as
the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Ministers may also
not to be ministers.

Given the above, we believe that in the scope of the concept
"Civil service" under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution are not included
the ‘posts’ of the Prime Minister, 4 | Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers.

FOR THE PRIME MINISTER:
JUDGMENT № 10Sofia, 10 May 2001constitutional case № 11/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Nedelcho Beronov (Promulgated, SG No. 47 of 18 May 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov - Rapporteur, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva National Assembly. The request maintains that the provision of Art. 52, para 6 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP), promulgated in SG, iss. 37 of 13 April 2001, contrary to the prohibition under Art. 65, para 2 of the Basic Law, creates inequality between the members of the Government and the other candidates for Members of Parliament, which violates Art. 10 and Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. By order of 24 April 2001 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits and the President, the Council of Ministers, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Bulgarian Association for Fair Elections and the Civil Initiative for Free and Democratic Elections were constituted as interested parties. The case received an opinion only from the Council of Ministers, which set out the considerations for which the request of the group of MPs was considered unfounded. The Constitutional Court, considering the arguments and considerations developed in the request and in the submitted opinion, adopted the following: of Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement, the candidates for Members of Parliament who hold public office shall suspend its performance after their registration. The disputed paragraph 6 of the same Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement stipulates that the provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply to ministers and the Prime Minister, that their powers continue after their registration as candidates for MPs. The Constitutional Court has repeatedly had occasion to discuss the concept “Civil service”, associating it with activity for carrying out the functions of the state (Decision № 16 of 1997 under Code of Civil Procedure № 8 of 1997, SG No. 106/1997). However, the court has explicitly stated that there is no legal definition of the civil service, therefore the meaning and content of the term in individual cases must be disclosed in accordance with the specific objectives of the provisions and the institutions to which it relates (Decision № 5 of 1993 under Code of Civil Procedure № 6 of 1993, SG, issue 31/1983). This requires an assessment not only of the nature of the activity carried out, but also of the constitutional status of the Council of Ministers and its members. Decision of the Grand National Assembly (SNC) of 13 September 1991 on the legal status of members of the Council of Ministers registered as candidates in parliamentary elections, albeit on the occasion of the election law in force at the time, treats its provision, which in its first part reproduces textually Article 65, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The same wording has the beginning of the first paragraph of Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement. The decision belongs to the creator of the Constitution, expresses his will and understanding. In its same decision, the Grand National Assembly explicitly stated that the members of the Council of Ministers were not required to suspend the performance of their functions after registering as candidates for Members of Parliament. The considerations of the Supreme National Assembly set out in its decision fully substantiate why the members of the cabinet should not suspend the performance of their duties. This allows the considerations of the Supreme National Assembly to be accepted in the present case as well. The Constitutional Court has already had cases to do so in its Decision № 2/1991 under c.d. № 24/1991, SG No. 106/1991, in the reasons of which it is stated that “The National Assembly with a decision of 13 September 1991 reasonably accepted that Article 49 of ZINPOSK does not apply to members of the Council of Ministers, if they participate in the elections, because in view of the functions and responsibilities of its members the country cannot be left without a functioning government. ”As explained in the decision of the SJC, the members of the Council of Ministers cannot transfer their powers to other persons, including the Deputy Ministers, who support them, but cannot be responsible for them. It follows from the special status of the Council of Ministers as the supreme constitutional body of the executive power that the powers of its members continue to be exercised until the election. by the National Assembly of a new government. The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in Decision № 9 of 8 May 2001 under c.d. № 9/2001, which gave a mandatory interpretation of Article 65, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, namely that this constitutional provision does not apply to the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers. They are political figures and governing bodies that implement the domestic and foreign policy of the Republic of Bulgaria. According to Articles 105-108 of the Constitution, the government implements domestic and foreign policy, ensures public order and national security, implements the general management of the state administration and the Armed Forces, manages the implementation of the state budget, organizes the management of state property, concludes, approves and denounces the international treaties provided for in the law. These activities are carried out under the general direction of the Prime Minister, to whom the Constitution with Article 108, paragraph 2 directly assigns to coordinate the general policy of the government, for which he is responsible. Similar obligations and responsibilities for their actions weigh on the ministers for the ministries headed by them (Article 108, paragraph 3 of the Constitution). In order not to leave the country without a legitimate government, they can perform their functions in the case of their registration as candidates for MPs. The disputed paragraph 6 of Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement is fully compliant with the mandatory interpretation given by the Constitutional Court of Article 65, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law, therefore it is not unconstitutional. The court has no reason to deviate from these decisions. the country cannot remain without a government, has found expression in several provisions of the Constitution. During the period after the termination of the powers of the previous one until the constitution of a new National Assembly and the election by it of a new Council of Ministers, the government performs its functions (Article 111, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Constitution). During this period, the Council of Ministers, elected by the previous National Assembly, operates. The same idea is enshrined in § 8 of the transitional and final provisions of the Basic Law. The powers of the Council of Ministers, respectively of its members, are terminated in the cases specified exhaustively in Article 111, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The registration for participation in parliamentary elections is not included in the enumeration. The equality of the candidates in the election campaign is ensured by other means, but not by termination of the powers of the members of the Council of Ministers. In this sense is Decision № 2/1991 under c.d. № 24/1991, in which, although on the situation of another constitutional body (the President), the Constitutional Court stated that the equality of candidates in the election campaign should be sought on a different level than in the fact that the state A body of the highest rank will continue to exercise its constitutionally assigned powers. For the stated reasons and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Rejected the request XXXVIII National Assembly for establishing the unconstitutionality of the provision of Art. 52, para 6 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (SG, issue 37 of 13 April 2001).
RESOLUTION № 11Sofia, 21 May 2001constitutional case № 18/2000, Judge-Rapporteur Nedelcho Beronov (Promulgated, SG No. 51 of 5 June 2001) in: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov - Rapporteur, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted at the request of 57 MPs from XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the provisions of Art. 101, para 1 and 5, Art. 102, para 1, Art. 104, para 1 and Art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the Medical Establishments Act (PHA), promulgated, SG, issue 62/1999, amended. and supplemented, SG No. 88/1999, SG No. 113/1999, SG No. 36/2000 and SG No. 65/2000. In addition, the establishment of the latter provision is requested (Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of the PPL) and for non-compliance with the European Charter of Local Self-Government (EHMS), promulgated, SG, issue 46/2000. The request maintains that the specified provisions of the PPL violate the exclusive right of municipal councils to dispose of municipal property. In the transformation of public health care institutions into commercial companies, the Minister of Health illegally disposes of foreign (municipal) and not state property. With the redistribution of the capital of the transformed hospitals, the nationalization of municipal property was essentially carried out. Therefore, the petitioners consider that the provisions specified in the request contradict the principles of the rule of law, local self-government, protection of property - Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 17, paragraph 5 and Article 140 of the Constitution. The provision of Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of the LPH is alleged to restrict the municipal councils in exercising their competencies and therefore does not comply with Art. 4, items 2 and 4 of the EHMS. On the grounds of Art. 22, para 3 of the Law on the Constitutional Court (CCA) to be declared null and void the acts of the Minister of Health for the transformation of the municipal health establishments. With a ruling of 18 January 2001 the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration constitutes as interested parties the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Health, the National Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria, the Bulgarian Medical Union and the Union of Dentists in Bulgaria. Stakeholders were given the opportunity to express their views on the request in writing. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Health and the Bulgarian Medical Union expressed their written views that the request was completely unfounded, setting out detailed reasons for its rejection. It is maintained that the disputed provisions of the Law on Public Health change the status of public health facilities, transforming them from those supported by the budget into commercial companies. According to the Municipal Property Act (MPA) and the Law on Local Self-Government and Local Administration (LLSGA) municipal property are the objects of the municipal infrastructure of local significance, intended for health care of the population. The united (former district) hospitals listed in the appendix to Art. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health serve the population of all municipalities within the former district (now district), and not only the population of the municipality where they are located. Therefore, they are not municipal property. The authors of these opinions point out that the protection of the health of citizens is a public interest of the highest order, which is why the basic law allows state regulation of public relations in this area. According to the authors of the same opinions Article 109, paragraph 1, item 3 of the LPH corresponds to the EHMS, which allows restriction of the powers of the local self-government bodies by another authority, when this is within the law. In these statements it is also noted that the orders of the Minister of Health for transformation of public health facilities are issued in implementation of the current at the time of their issuance PPE, therefore can not be acts issued by an incompetent authority within the meaning of Art. 22, para 3 ZKS. In addition, it is stated that according to Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the Supreme Administrative Court rules on disputes over the legality of acts of ministers. The National Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria takes the opposite view - that the disputed provisions are unconstitutional. Considerations for non-compliance with MHMS are not specified. The author of this opinion considers that the regional hospitals are public municipal property according to § 7 of the transitional and final provisions of LLSGA and art. 2, para 1, items 6 and 9 ZOS. According to the same author, the guaranteed constitutional right of ownership of the municipalities has been violated by Art. 17, para 1 of the Basic Law, as the provision of Art. 101, para 5 of the PPA transfers municipal property to joint stock companies in which the municipality is not sole owner of the capital. There is an understanding that with Art. This is not done by the competent body - the municipal council, to be treated as the formation of a company with property, municipal property. Having discussed the considerations set forth in the request and in the submitted opinions of the parties, the Constitutional Court accepts the following: І. On the request for establishing unconstitutionality The provisions of Art. 101, para 1 and 5, Art. 102, para 1 and Art. 104, para 1 of the Public Health Act are from the section “Transformation of public health establishments”. The basis of their dispute is the question whether these establishments or part of them are owned by the municipalities. This requires the same issue to be discussed first. The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria specifies municipal property as one of the types of property, but does not contain provisions that specify the objects of the same property or specify criteria for such specification. The Constitutional Court had an occasion in the interpretation of Article 17, paragraph 2 of the Constitution to point out that only a law can determine the range of things that are public or private property of municipalities. The Constitutional Court would seize the prerogatives of the legislator if it tried to distinguish the public property of the state and the municipalities from their private property (Decision № 19 of 1993 under Code of Civil Procedure № 11 of 1993, SG, issue 4 of 1994). ). Article 17, paragraph 4 provides for these issues to be regulated by law. Therefore, it is necessary to keep in mind the legal framework of municipal property. After municipal property was absent as a legal institution in the Bulgarian legal system for more than 40 years, the restoration of its legal framework was carried out by amending the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria in 1971 and The Property Act (AA) in 1990 (SG, issue 29 and issue 31 of 1990) and further developed it with the amendment of the same law upon adoption in the following year of LLSGA (SG, issue 77 of 1991) . According to § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of LLSGA with the entry into force of this law become the property of the municipalities exhaustively specified state property, including the objects of municipal infrastructure of local importance, intended for health care. The same legal framework is included in Art. 2, para 1, item 6 (SG, issue 44 of 1996) and item 9 of the AIA (SG, issue 96 of 1999), adding that the indicated sites must be intended for servicing the population of the respective municipality. The disputed provisions are in line with the wording they had when the PPA was adopted in July 1999 and regulate the transformation of the existing at the same time public health facilities.1. According to Article 101, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Health, the existing public health care institutions, dispensaries and hospital diagnostic and treatment structures at higher medical schools are transformed into medical institutions - sole proprietorships, by order of the Minister of Health. The provision applies to all health establishments mentioned in it, regardless of their ownership. According to the petitioners, the provision referred to the municipal hospitals means that the Minister of Health has illegally disposed of foreign (municipal) and not state property. The health establishments established by the Council of Ministers for the needs of public health are public - § 2 of the Additional Provisions to the Public Health Act (EPA), Supplement SG, issue 12/1997. Until the entry into force of the EPA, the status of health establishments shall be regulated in the EPA, according to which these establishments are public and private - Art. , issue 12 of 1997, amended, issue 62 of 1999). This law does not divide public health facilities into state and municipal depending on ownership. A public health institution shall be opened, transformed and closed by the Council of Ministers on a proposal of the Minister of Health (Art. 2, para 2 EPA, amended, SG, issue 12 of 1997, issue 70 of 1998 and issue .62 of 1999). Thus, the existing public health institutions were created, which are transformed according to the Health Insurance Act. The status of the public health establishments is changed, as they are transformed from those on budget support into commercial companies. With the order for transformation under art. 101, para 1 of the Public Health Act the respective properties and things lose their quality of public property and become private state, respectively municipal property. There are no constitutional obstacles for this transformation to take place by an act of a minister, insofar as in this case this power has been delegated to him by law. The Constitution authorizes the legislator by law to determine "The regime of its objects of municipal property" - Article 17, paragraph 4. This power includes the conversion of public property into private. The one who can indicate which municipal property is public and which is private, can also transform. At the same time, as soon as the legislator can transform, he may by law delegate this power to a body designated by him. According to the Constitution, the Minister of Health has been designated as such a body in the Health Insurance Act. The Constitution does not prohibit the legislator from deciding which is private or public property. The transformation is not a violation of the basic law. By virtue of Art. 101, para 1 of the LPL, applied and interpreted together with Art. 101, para 6 of the LPL, the right of ownership over the transformed public establishments, other than those under para 4 and 5 , is transformed into a right of ownership over the capital of the company. The holder of the right of ownership remains the same. This is the municipality on whose territory the seat of the company is located. The rights of the owner are exercised by the municipal council. Initially the order for transformation under art. 101, para 1 of the LPL does not affect the holder of the right of ownership. In this case the right of ownership of the municipality over the medical establishment is not taken away. The property retains its municipal character. Only the legal form in which this right is exercised changes. The property law consequence of the order is the change in the nature of the right of ownership - from public law to private law. Art. 101, para 1 of the Land Use Act does not nationalize municipal property. There is no hypothesis of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution, because there is no compulsory expropriation of property, which from municipal becomes state. There is no violation of constitutional norms guaranteeing the right to municipal property and the request on this ground in this part should rejected.2. The second disputed provision is of Art. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health. This article creates a special (within the Law on Public Health) regulation for medical establishments explicitly indicated in an annex to the law (all regional hospitals in the individual cities - 26 in total). These establishments are municipal property according to art. 2, para 1, items 6 and 9 of the LPA and § 7, item 6 of the LLSGA. They are medical establishments of local significance within the meaning of Article 101 of the Law on Public Health. This is evident from the circumstance that the regulation under Art. 101, para 5 of the LPL is special, independent. It is separate from the regulation under Article 101, paragraph 4, which regulates the transformation of "national centers engaged in medical activities". The argument that hospitals are not public property is Article 2 of the State Property Act (LSA, SG, issue 44 of 1996). Its provision can be summarized - these are the properties intended for "permanent satisfaction of public needs of national importance through common use". The argument that the former district hospitals cease to be public municipal property because they no longer serve one, but several municipalities or the right of ownership to be associated with the mixed financing of municipal sites. Indeed, one can argue about the content of the term “local significance” used in §§ 6 and 7 of the LLSGA and in the APA. There is indeed room for interpretation here, but which, in the presence of the expression "needs of national importance" in the LSA, does not create any difficulty. These will be local needs that meet the needs of the residents of the municipality, not the population of the country. The rule cannot be absolute and the needs will be local even if they satisfy the needs of several municipalities. As far as the former district hospitals, described in the application of art. 101, para 5 of the PPA, are public municipal property, the provisions contradict art. .5 of the Constitution and in essence constitute compulsory expropriation of property without state needs. After the transformation of the medical establishments under Art. 101, para 5 of the PPA into joint stock companies the right of ownership over their capital is acquired ex lege respectively by the state - for 51 per cent of the capital and of the municipalities - 49 per cent of the capital. The law stipulates that shareholders may be several municipalities, as their participation within the 49 per cent provided to them is distributed proportionally to the population living in them. legislation performs two functions. It directly transfers ownership from the municipalities to the state (in cases where the municipalities originally owned more than half of the public medical institution); it redistributes the right of ownership over the hospital between the municipalities according to the number of the population. In both directions the norm has an alienating effect. In relation to the state, the norm performs the function of nationalization without the conditions of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution being met (justified state need, preliminary and equivalent compensation). The state acquires a majority ownership of the converted hospital, whether or not it has ever owned the hospital before. In cases where the property was entirely or predominantly municipal, its subsequent nationalization (51 percent of it) is always the expropriation of municipal property in favor of the state. The prohibition for such expropriation is contained in Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law. The Constitution obliges the state to guarantee the right to municipal property - Article 17, paragraph 1. On the other hand, the provision of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law protects municipal property against the state. To deny this would be to render meaningless the independent constitutionally established type of municipal property. The concept of "municipal property" in Article 17 and the constitutional norm of Article 140 "The municipality has the right to its property" will remain empty phrases and the state will at any time at its discretion by law to expropriate municipal property. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Procurement creates unjust enrichment of some of them at the expense of others. It turns out that a municipality that has built, expanded and / or furnished the hospital exclusively with its own funds will receive less participation, as its population is smaller than that of the neighboring municipality. the construction and furnishing of the hospital, and with the act for transformation he turns out to be the owner of a property.Obviously the regulation creates conditions for violation of the principles of justice - preamble of the Constitutions of the rule of law - Art. 4, para. 1 and again of the prohibition for compulsory expropriation of property - Art. 17, para. activity - art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution. That is why the provision of art. 101, para 5 of the LPL is unconstitutional.3. The provision of Article 102, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Health refers to the transformation of existing public health facilities for outpatient care without explaining who acquires ownership of the capital of the established sole proprietorships. state, due to which the allegations of violation of Art. 17, para 5 and Art. 140 of the Constitution are unfounded. All public health establishments for outpatient care are municipal property. Therefore, the undisputed para 4 of the same art. 102 of the LPL refers to acts of a municipal council, and para 6 - to managerial functions of the mayor of the municipality.The also undisputed para 1, item 2 of Art. 109 of the Public Health Act states that the municipal councils as owners take decisions for the privatization of this category of medical establishments. is a violation of the Constitution, as explained in the discussion of Article 101, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Health. The request should be rejected in this part.4. Pursuant to Art. 104, para 1 of the Public Health Act with the transformation of the public health establishments under Art. 101, 102 and 103 the movable and immovable property provided for management and administration - state or municipal property, included in the balance sheets of the health establishments transform, become the property of the companies. The transformation into commercial companies is associated with changes in ownership. The state or the municipality loses ownership over the material composition of the property included in the balance sheets of the health care institutions. The right of ownership is transformed into the right of ownership over the capital of commercial companies. The owner of the capital also acquires management and control rights. The holder of all real rights is the company as an independent legal entity, not the owner of the capital of the company. These changes do not lead to the transformation of municipal property into state or vice versa. The holders of the right of ownership over the property of the transformed public health establishments become holders of the right of ownership over the capital of the established commercial companies. At the creation of art. 104, para 1 of the Law on Public Health the legislator acted in implementation is not unconstitutional.5. The constitutionality of the requirement under Art. 109, para 1 item 3 of the Law on Privatization and all actions related to the privatization procedure of the municipal councils on the privatization of medical establishments with municipal participation to be carried out “after approval or under proposal of the Minister of Health. ”The privatization actions are of an administrative nature; they aim at the transfer of ownership of natural or legal persons. The holder of this right is changed. Therefore, an inalienable element of the right of ownership is the power of the owner with an autonomous act to dispose of his right. The will of the owner (municipal council) to dispose of his right of ownership by transferring it to another (natural or legal person) cannot depend on the approval or permission of a third party (state body). The introduction of the disputed requirement inadmissibly infringes the right of ownership of the municipality, which is why it is unconstitutional - Article 140 of the Basic Law. The declaration of the unconstitutionality of the disputed part of Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of the LPL has as a consequence its termination and existence as a legal norm of the current legislation (Art. 151, para 2 of the Constitution and Art. 2 ZKS). Therefore, the assessment under Article 149, paragraph 1, item 4 of the Basic Law for non-compliance of the same legal provision with the ECHR is pointless. The request should not be considered in this part. In this sense is the practice of the court - Decision № 19/1997 on c.d. № 13/1997, SG, issue 120/1997, Decision № 9/1998 under c.d. № 6/1998, SG, issue 45/1998 and Decision № 8/1999 on c.d. № 4/1999, SG, issue 47/1999. For the stated reasons and on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, items 2 and 4 of the Constitution the Constitutional Court RESOLVES: Declares unconstitutional the provisions of art. 101, para 5 and art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or upon proposal of the Minister of Health” of the Medical Establishments Act, promulgated, SG, iss. 62/1999, amended and add., SG, no. 88/1999, 113/1999, 36/2000 and 65/2000. Rejects the request of 57 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 101, para 1, Art. 102, para 1 and art. 104, para 1 of the same law. Leave without consideration the request for establishing inconsistency of art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or upon proposal of the Minister of Health” of the same law with the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
DECISION № 12Sofia, 22 May 2001constitutional case № 12/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Todor Todorov (Promulgated, SG No. 50 of 1 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Members: Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov - rapporteur, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was initiated at the request of the Prosecutor General. The request maintains that the provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP - SG, issue 37 of 2001) contradicts the Constitution. The disputed norm states that "During the election campaign, the registered candidates for MPs and advocates may not be detained and prosecuted except in cases of a serious crime." According to the request, the provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the ZINP contradicts of the constitutional principle for equality of the citizens - art. 6, para 2 of the Constitution. It is alleged that both the general rule (Article 6, paragraph 2) and the exceptions to it in the field of criminal law are defined at the constitutional level. Immunity cannot be introduced by law. ”By order of 3 May 2001, the Constitutional Court granted the request for examination on the merits and constituted the President, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court as interested parties. The Central Election Commission, the Supreme Bar Council, the Bulgarian Association for Fair Elections, the Civil Initiative for Free and Democratic Elections Association, the Bulgarian Human Rights Advocates, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Association for European Integration and Human Rights. The challenged norm is supported by the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Bar Council, and by the Association for European Integration and Human Rights - only regarding the advocates. According to the opinions presented by the Council of Ministers and Bulgarian human rights lawyers, the disputed norm complies with the Constitution. to be rejected The Constitutional Court, after discussing the disputed provision, fully shares the considerations set out in the opinion of the Council of Ministers, namely: 1. Clarifying the compliance of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement with the Constitution, as follows from the request of the Prosecutor General, implies an answer to two main questions: - whether Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement creates privileges for individual citizens based on someone of the signs specified in Art. 6, para 2 of the Constitution - whether the Constitution, regulating restrictions in the criminal liability of persons holding certain positions (Art. 69 and Art. 70, Art. 103, para 1 and 4, Art. .132, para 2 and Article 147, para 6) excludes the possibility for such regulation in relation to other persons to be contained in law.2. As stated in the reasons of Decision № 14 of the Constitutional Court of 1992 on constitutional case № 14 of 1992 (SG, issue 93 of 1992), equality before the law means equality of all citizens before the normative acts and obligation for their equal treatment by the state authorities. Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution prohibits the restriction of rights or the creation of privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political affiliation, personal and social status or property status. According to the same decision of the Constitutional Court, the signs for non-admission of restrictions of the rights or granting of privileges, specified in art. 6, para 2 are listed exhaustively.3. It is not clear from the request which of the features under Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is the basis of the privilege under Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement. The special status of the persons registered for participation in the elections as candidates for Members of Parliament and of their deputies is not a privilege of a separate group of citizens, based on some of the features specified in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, but is established for ensuring the free exercise of the right of citizens to vote and to be elected. The position of a candidate for Member of Parliament or Advocate does not depend on any of the features specified in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. Any person, regardless of his or her race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political affiliation, personal and social status or property status, may register as a candidate for MP or Advocate. It is enough for it to meet the conditions required by the Constitution and the laws of the country. The status of a candidate for a Member of the National Assembly or of his / her representative does not require the presence of a certain attribute, specified in Art. There is no constitutional prohibition on restricting the rights or granting privileges on other grounds than those exhaustively listed in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The reasons for the above-mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court state: “From these and other cases explicitly mentioned in the Constitution, it is evident that restrictions on the rights and granting of privileges to certain social groups are permissible under the Constitution. However, it must be emphasized that in all these cases it is a matter of socially necessary restrictions on the rights or granting of privileges to certain groups of citizens while maintaining the priority of the principle of equality of all citizens before the law. The precise and comprehensive indication of the social characteristics which justify the non-restriction of rights and the granting of privileges is a guarantee against unjustified extension of the grounds for the admission of restrictions on the rights of citizens or privileges. ”5. It is indisputable that in the specific case the regulation in art. 53, para 1 ZINP is socially necessary. It is a guarantee for the free exercise of active and passive suffrage. The election campaign begins 30 days before and ends 24 hours before election day (Article 54 of the Law on Elections). The term is short, clearly defined and in view of the provision of art. 64, para 3 of the Constitution this period cannot be arbitrarily extended by the legislator. Candidates for MPs and their deputies have the opportunity to prepare their participation in the elections and to conduct pre-election campaigning only during this period and within its framework they do not have the necessary time to defend themselves against unfounded accusations. The initiation of criminal proceedings or the detention of a candidate or Member of Parliament will irreparably infringe on their rights, as it may frustrate their participation in the elections, impede the election of the candidate and affect the election results by discrediting the voters both the candidate for MP and the political force he represents. Even if the criminal proceedings are terminated and the charges are dropped, this will not lead to a change in the election results and will not restore the voter vote as it really would. The likelihood of such a hypothesis in the process of forming the legislature determines the right of the legislator to take measures to prevent external factors and circumstances to influence the free exercise of suffrage and as a consequence to lead to a change in the election results. .6. The perception of the above gives grounds to conclude that Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement does not contradict Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as, on the one hand, it does not establish a privilege based on any of the features specified in the text, and on the other hand, insofar as a privilege is established, it is socially necessary.7. From the systematic place of the texts in the Constitution, which establish restrictions in the criminal liability of persons holding certain positions, it can be concluded that they do not exhaust the constitutionally admissible possibilities for limiting the criminal liability. The regulation of these restrictions is contained in the Constitution, as they are part of the statute of the respective body regulated in the Constitution. This conclusion is supported by the fact that, in principle, the overall regulation of the conditions for the emergence of criminal liability and the procedure for its implementation, including the matter of criminally responsible persons and hypotheses of release from criminal liability, is contained in legislation - Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code. code. In the Constitution, criminal irresponsibility and criminal inviolability are not regulated in general, in a general way as a separate legal institution, but refer only to certain persons. The provisions of Art. 69 and Art. 70, Art. 103, para 1 and 4 and Art. 132, para 1, and Art. 147, para. 6 of the Constitution regulate this issue separately for the Members of Parliament, the President and the Vice-President, the judges, the prosecutors and the investigators and the constitutional judges. The constitutional principle of equality of citizens is regulated in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, included in Chapter One - Basic Principles. The constitutional obligation to hand over to anyone accused of a crime the judiciary is in Article 31, paragraph 1, included in Chapter Two - Fundamental Rights and Obligations of Citizens. And the regulation, which establishes restrictions in the criminal liability for persons holding certain positions, is not in Chapter One as a constitutionally regulated exception to the general principle of Art. 6, para 2 (regardless of the sign on which it is established), nor is it in Chapter Two as a constitutionally regulated exception from Art. 31, para 1. The regulation is not unified and summarized as a separate legal institute, but is included in Chapter Three - National Assembly, Chapter Four - President of the Republic, Chapter Six - Judiciary and Chapter Eight - Constitutional Court. In this situation, the interpretation of the constitutional texts in view of their systematic place imposes the conclusion that they do not aim to regulate exhaustively the cases of criminal irresponsibility and criminal inviolability, but refer only to private cases within the status of the respective state bodies. This means that there is no prohibition by law to regulate criminal inviolability in other cases not mentioned in the Constitution, unless this is contrary to constitutional principles.8. The Constitutional Court finds it necessary to pay attention to the circumstance that the norm of Art. 53, para 1 of the Law on Public Procurement treats the issue only of criminal inviolability. It does not regulate the granting of "immunity" in the true sense, understood as criminal irresponsibility. In its practice so far, the court has taken a stand on these issues in a number of decisions - Decision № 10 of 27 July 1992 on c.d. № 13/92 (SG, issue 63 of 1992), Decision № 2 of 18 February 1993 under c.d. № 36/92 (SG, issue 16 of 1993), Decision № 4 of 17 May 1995 under c.d. № 2/95 (SG, issue 62 of 1995). In these decisions, the court uses the general concept of "immunity", combining the issues of criminal irresponsibility with the issues of criminal inviolability. In all these cases, however, the merger applies only to constitutionally established immunities. The admissibility of establishing criminal immunity by law in favor of persons other than those specified by the Constitution has not been discussed.9. The court held that decision № 3 of 7 March 1998 under c.d. № 1/98 (SG, issue 29 of 1998) treats only the issue of criminal irresponsibility. In it, the provision of Art. 206, para. 2 of the Ministry of Interior, according to which officers and sergeants from the Ministry of Interior cannot be investigated and detained without the permission of the Minister of Interior. The norm in question creates conditions for indefinite blocking of the possibility for criminal prosecution, including for serious crimes, which is essentially criminal irresponsibility. Therefore, the cited decision is irrelevant to the issues of criminal inviolability, which in its essence and function differs significantly from criminal irresponsibility.10. The court takes into account the difference between criminal irresponsibility and criminal inviolability. Unlike criminal irresponsibility, criminal inviolability is purely procedural in nature. It is always urgent and does not exclude the responsibility of the persons for crimes committed by them, but only postpones it. Insofar as the provision of Art. 53, para 1 ZINP grants the candidates for Members of Parliament and the advocates criminal immunity only for the term of the election campaign, the court does not find grounds for declaring it unconstitutional.11. The court, in accordance with what has been said so far, does not find a contradiction between Article 31, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement. According to the constitutional text, anyone accused of a crime must be handed over to the judiciary within the legally prescribed time limit. In this case, Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement, by introducing criminal inviolability of the candidates registered for participation in the parliamentary elections and their representatives during the election campaign, sets another, also legal term, although different from the general one, for their transfer to the judiciary. Therefore, the text does not block the possibility of instituting criminal proceedings and does not preclude the exercise of criminal liability.12. That is why the court accepts that the granting of criminal immunity to the candidates for MPs and their deputies during the election campaign is not a privilege based on a feature specified in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution and there is no contradiction between Article 53. , para 1 ZINP or other constitutional principle. Therefore, the provision of Art. 53, para 1 ZINP does not contradict the Constitution. Based on the above and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the court RESOLVES: Rejects the request of the Prosecutor General to declare it unconstitutional the provision of Art. 53, para 1 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (SG, issue 37 of 2001).
JUDGMENT № 13Sofia, 29 May 2001constitutional case № 2/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Penka Tomcheva (Promulgated, SG No. 51 of 5 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva - rapporteur The Constitutional Court was seised with two separate requests to establish the unconstitutionality of the law. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (Interpretative Law), prom. SG, no. 108 of December 29, 2000. The first is of January 19, 2001. and its petitioners are 56 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly, in which the present case was instituted. For the second request from 5.02.2001 the initiator is a court panel from the III division of the Supreme Administrative Court - c.d. № 4/2001. Given the community of the request of the indicated independently legitimized under Art. 150, para. 1 and para. 2 of the Constitution subjects and the need to issue a decision, with a ruling of 13.02.2001 later the case was joined to the first. According to the petitioners the first sign of unconstitutionality of the attacked in its entirety Interpretative Law is that the National Assembly is not assigned by the Constitution and in particular by Art. 84, item 1 to interpret the laws, but only to adopt, amend, supplement and repeal them. The main considerations of the petitioners - MPs are that the interpretation could replace the actual will of the legislator. The petitioner - a panel of judges of Division III of the SAC, in addition, considers that the legislature violates the basic constitutional principle of separation of powers, formulated in Art. 8, as well as the provisions of art. 124 and Art. 125 of the Constitution. The second part of the request contains considerations on the merits of the Interpretative Law. In summary, they are reduced to the unconstitutionality of the interpreted text of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (LFRB), prom. SG, no. 153 / 23.12.1998, amended, SG, iss. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Minister of Justice, the Ministers of Foreign and Internal Affairs were constituted as interested parties by a ruling of 13.02.2001. Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Prosecutor General and the Supreme Bar Council. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Foundation have submitted written statements on behalf of these countries. Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights ”,“ Bulgarian Helsinki Committee ”and the Supreme Bar Council, according to which unanimity was expressed on the issue of the possibility for the National Assembly to give an authentic interpretation of laws already adopted by it with a separate interpretative law, without violating constitutional principles and norms. In the essence of the Interpretative Law the opinions are opposite The Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the National Assembly consider that a single article of the Interpretative Law does not contradict the Constitution. According to the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation and the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the essential part of the Interpretative Law is unconstitutional on the same grounds as it contradicts the Constitution and the interpreted Art. 47 of the FRBA. The basic right to protection under Art. 56 of the Constitution. In order to rule, the Constitutional Court took into account the following: І. On the issue of the possibility for the National Assembly to adopt interpretative laws, the three constitutions of the country preceding the present one provide for a special National Assembly directly according to Art. 44 of the Tarnovo Constitution of 1879, and through its permanent bodies, such as the Presidium under Art. 35, item 4 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria of 1947 and the State Council under Art. 93, item 8 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria from 1971, to give obligatory for all interpretations of the laws. In the current Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria from 1991 in Chapter III, dedicated to the National Assembly, a constitutional norm that explicitly allows or prohibits the legislature from interpreting the laws, no. From this, as well as from those formulated in Art. 84, item 1 of the Constitution legislative competences, among which to adopt, amend, supplement and repeal the laws it follows that the National Assembly may also interpret them. Subsequent clarification and refinement of the wording of a legal norm through interpretation so as to clearly understand the meaning, scope and purpose invested in it at its initial creation is an opportunity from which there are no constitutional reasons to deprive the National Assembly. In order to give equal force and significance to the interpretative act with those of interpretations, it is necessary that the form of the two acts be the same. In this sense, the Constitutional Court has already incidentally expressed an opinion in Decision № 13 of 1996 on c.d. № 11/96, SG, no. 66/96. The interpretive activity of the National Assembly, carried out by law, ie with an act which, both because of the author and because of its form, has universal force and obligation for all, in no way replaces what is provided by the Constitution of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court with Art. 124 and Art. 125 right they to exercise supreme judicial supervision for accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts. The possibility in the interpretation to replace the actual will of the legislator with another is an unconvincing argument, as far as this is no less possible in the exhaustively indicated in Art. 84, item 1 of the Constitution activities, namely for amendment, supplement and repeal of the laws. The current parliamentary practice of repeatedly amending adopted and applied legal provisions is a reality. On the merits of the Interpretative LawThe provision of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, which provoked the adoption of the challenged Interpretative Law, was repealed by § 35 of the adopted, meanwhile and entered into force on the day of its promulgation in SG, no. 42 of 27.04.2001, Law to amend and supplement the LFRB. No repeal of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the LFRB, subject of the present proceedings. In view of the indicated new legislative permission (repeal of the interpreted norm) and the lack of explicit repeal of the Law for its interpretation, the question arises to what extent the repealed provision of Art. 47 On this issue the Constitutional Court accepts that insofar as the Interpretative Law contains others, outside the interpretative norms, implicitly included in the general formulated request for declaring the entire law unconstitutional, they as part of the subject of the request may and should be checked. For such norms the court should rule on the merits. With regard to the norms of the disputed law, the nature of which is explanatory, interpretative, the repeal of the interpreted norm makes it meaningless to check the unconstitutionality of the Interpretative Law in this part. Moreover, due to the lack of a subject according to art. 22, para 1 of the Law on the Constitutional Court, in the part for the interpretation the proceedings should be terminated. The content of the sentences from first to fifth inclusive of the only article of the disputed fully Interpretative Law have interpretative character because: in the first sentence the concrete texts from LFRB, orders under which are not subject to judicial review. The following second, third, fourth and fifth sentences, although unnecessary, in fact re-descriptively explain the interpretation of the first sentence, which outlines the textual scope of the prohibition of judicial review. The repeal of this rule invalidates the interpretation, which implies that the Interpreter law in the part for sentences from first to fifth inclusive is without subject. The interpretative norm in this part has no independent meaning and application, outside and independently of the interpreted, meanwhile repealed norm of art. 47 of the FRBA, due to which the proceedings should be terminated. The meaning of sentence six of the fully disputed Interpretative Law is different, which reads: “Judicial act on the merits, ruled on an appeal against an order issued on the basis of Art. 40, para. 1, item 2 in connection with Art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, item 1 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, is null and void and does not give rise to legal consequences ”. With the cited part of the Interpretative Law, the National Assembly as a body of the legislative power has exercised more than the ones constitutionally provided to it by Art. 84, Art. 85 and Art. 86 rights. The legislative approach adopted by the cited sixth sentence with regard to the court decisions rendered so far and entered into force indicates a kind of administration of justice by the legislative body. It is obviously unconstitutional. The principles of the rule of law, the separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary (Art. 4, Art. 8 and Art. 117, para. 2 of the Constitution) have been violated. There is no constitutional norm that allows the legislature to rule on the validity of judicial acts issued by the independent judiciary on specific, individual disputes. In the part for sentence six of the only article, the Interpretative Law has no interpretative character, but is an expression of the decisive will of the Legislative Assembly for a certain category of entered into force decisions issued by the independent judiciary. In this sense is also Decision № 4 of 1998 under c.d. № 16/97. In this part the disputed law should be declared unconstitutional. The subsequent development of the court cases, initiated and unfinished before the repeal of Art. 47 of the LFRB, should find a legislative solution in the transitional and final provisions of the Law for amendment and supplement of the LFRB, SG, iss. 42 of 27.04.2001 (LIDHRB), insofar as with the mentioned law the procedure for appealing the administrative orders under LFRB has been changed, incl. with regard to the court competent to rule on the appeals subject to judicial review (§ 33 of the Law on the Protection of Judicial Achievements). Based on the stated considerations, on the grounds of Art. 149, para. 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: 1. Declares unconstitutional the sixth article of the only article of the Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, promulgated in SG, issue 108, of 29.12.2000, with the following content: “Judicial act on the merits, ruled on an appeal against an order issued on the grounds of Art. 40, para 1, item 2 in connection with Art. 10, para 1, item 1, on the grounds of Art. 42 or on the grounds of Art. 10, para 1, item 1 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, is null and void and does not give rise to legal consequences ”. Terminates the proceedings in the case initiated at the request of 56 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly and Judicial Chamber of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court to declare unconstitutional the Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria in its remaining part regarding Article sole, sentences 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 and the final provision.
JUDGMENT № 14Sofia, 30 May 2001constitutional case № 7/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Zhivan Belchev (Promulgated, SG No. 52 of 8 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev - Rapporteur, Penka Tomcheva of the unconstitutionality of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents of the former State Security (ZIDZDDBDS, promulgated, SG, issue 24 of 13.03.2001). The reasonable part of the request maintains the opinion that after the adoption of the law at first reading, a new bill was practically submitted to the committee, which differs in principle from the one adopted at the first vote. In fact, this is a new law, submitted not by MPs or by the Council of Ministers and it was adopted in one (second) vote. ZIDZDDBDS contradicts the provisions of Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 87, paragraph 1 and Article 88 , para 1 of the Constitution.2. According to the petitioners, the law contradicts the Constitution not only in terms of the legislative process, but also in terms of its content. They maintain that the principles of the rule of law, the separation of powers, the right to protect citizens against encroachment on their honor, dignity and With a ruling of March 29, 2001, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration on the merits and constituted as interested parties the National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Prosecutor General, the National Intelligence Service, the National Security Service, the Human Rights Committee, the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after 9 September 1944, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Bulgarian Media Coalition and the Union of Journalists in Bulgaria. The Constitutional Court opportunity, opinions on the request have been filed The Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Prosecutor General, the National Intelligence Service, the National Security Service - Ministry of Interior, the Human Rights Committee, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after 9 September 1944. Opinions of the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Director of the National Security Service - Ministry of Interior, the National Intelligence Service, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after September 9, 1944 maintain that ZIDZDDBDS does not contradict of specific norms of the Constitution. The Prosecutor General expresses an opinion that the Law on Public Procurement in general, as well as the impugned provisions individually do not contradict the Constitution with the exception of § 5 in its part regarding the provision of Article 3, paragraph 2, b. The Human Rights Committee considers that the request of the group of MPs is justified. The Constitutional Court, after discussing the arguments and written opinions of the interested parties set forth in the request, accepted the following: to the petitioners that the Law on Amendments and Supplements to the Law on Amendments and Supplements is completely unconstitutional, as in its essence it represents a new law and not a Law for amendment and supplement, and that it was adopted only on one (second) vote is unfounded.1. The bill for amendment and supplementation of the VAT Act was submitted to the National Assembly under № -054-01-122 by MP Metodi Borisov Andreev and a group of MPs on 30.11.2000 and the Speaker of the National Assembly by order distributed it to the two standing committees : The Committee on National Security and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Legislation against Corruption, the first of which is leading. The claim of the petitioners that a "mysterious", "apocryphal bill", drafted and submitted by an unknown person, was submitted to the National Assembly is obviously unfounded, ergo, contrary to Article 87, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.2. The Law for amendment and supplementation of the VAT Act does not contradict art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution. The position of the petitioners that the Act is contradictory to art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution is based on the statement that the law was adopted in violation of art. .11, para 1 of the Law on Normative Acts (LNA) and art. 68 and art. 69 of the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly (PODNS). The same is insolvent. It is notorious that the purpose of the LNA is the creation of rules for the drafting of the normative acts, which are important for the application and interpretation of the acts. The provision of art. 11, para 1 LNA is a legal, not a constitutional norm and its non-observance at the adoption of a law cannot be a ground for establishing the unconstitutionality. To accept the opposite means that any special law would be unconstitutional as adopted in contradiction with the constitutional principle of the rule of law. A conclusion in this sense follows from Decision № 5 of 12.03.1998 under c.d. № 2/98 (promulgated, SG, issue 30/98), by which the Constitutional Court has accepted that the “Assessment of constitutionality”, according to Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of The Constitution can be given only in view of whether constitutional provisions have been violated, and not other normative acts. ”The situation is identical with the provisions in PODNS. They also do not have the rank of a constitutional norm and their violation cannot justify the unconstitutionality of the law. In this sense is Decision № 3 of 3.04.1992 of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 30/91 (promulgated, SG No. 30/92) The fact that the PODNS is also subject to control for constitutionality shows that its non-observance cannot be equated with a violation of the Constitution. of the petitioners for violations of LNA and PODNS are unfounded. The provision of art. 11, para 1 LNA provides that repeal of a law and its replacement with a new one is allowed only when the amendments are numerous and significant. The legislator has provided for two cumulative requirements, which limit the cases of repeal of an existing law and its replacement with a new one. In this case, the petitioners base their claims only on the quantitative requirement, namely that the basic law - VATA, which is amended, has only 14 articles, located on 3 pages, while the draft of the AML / CFT originally submitted to the National Assembly had 22 paragraphs, located on 7 pages, and the adopted one was three times larger in volume than the originally submitted and was located on 17 pages. which has been amended and supplemented by the basic law is significantly larger in volume, as it contains numerous amendments, but it does not rearrange the matter in a new, essentially different way. It expands the scope of the current law, but essentially regulates the same public relations. The principles, the philosophy and the spirit of the basic law - ZDDBDS (promulgated, SG, issue 63 of 1997) have not been changed. The Law for amendment and supplement of ZDDBDS creates a more detailed regulation, compliant with the motives of Decision № 10 of 22.09. 1997 of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 14/1997 (promulgated, SG No. 89/97) regarding the bodies that carry out the inspection under the law, the place of the President and the Constitutional Court in the system of state bodies. It fully ensures the right to information of the society, as well as the obligation of the state to guarantee the dignity and rights of the individual. The Constitution does not limit the possibilities of the legislator to supplement or amend the draft laws between the two votes. In this sense, the provision of Article 68, paragraph 1 PODNS explicitly allows not only amendments but also additions to the bill adopted at the first vote, and the provision of Article 69, paragraph 3 PODNS places restrictions only on the discussion and voting of proposals that contradict the principles of the bill passed at the first vote. do not indicate which of the principles in the bill adopted at the first vote contradict the texts, supplemented and amended during the second vote. The draft of the AML / CFT Act was submitted by MPs In accordance with Article 87, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and it was adopted in two votes, as required by the provision of Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. Between the first and second reading, written proposals were received from 9 MPs for amendment and supplement the law. Other proposals were made at the meeting of the National Security Commission. After the debates of the committee in the plenary hall of the National Assembly, in the second reading of the law all proposals were put to the vote. have fulfilled their constitutional authority in the course of the legislative process between the two votes to amend the draft law on the Law on the Protection of Civil Procedure Rights without changing the principles and objectives of the law, it is obvious that the constitutional requirement of Article 88, paragraph 1 has not been violated. and adopted in two votes, held in two separate sessions. In view of the above considerations, the Constitutional Court considers that the adoption of the AML / CFT Act did not violate the provision of Article 11, paragraph 1 of the LNA and the provisions of Article 68 and Article 69 of the PODNS, and to make justified the request of the petitioners to declare the unconstitutionality of the whole law due to violation of the principle of On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in its part, which amended Article 4 of the law and of § 7 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Freedoms of the Republic of Bulgaria, in its part new art. 4d of the lawAccording to art. 4, para 1 “The activity under art. 3, para 1, item 1, 3 and 4 shall be carried out by a permanent Commission for disclosure of documents and establishment of affiliation to the former State Security or the former Intelligence Department of the General Staff, hereinafter referred to as “the commission under Art. 4, para 1”. .4, para 1 consists of 7 members, appointed for a term of five years, as follows: five - elected by the National Assembly on the proposal of different parliamentary groups, and two - appointed by the Council of Ministers. According to the new provision of art. , para 1 of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (SDBS) and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, hereinafter referred to as “the commission under Art. 4d, para 1”. This commission consists of 5 members, including a chairman, for a term of 5 years, as follows: chairman appointed by the president of the Republic of Bulgaria, two members - judges of the Supreme Court of Cassation, appointed by the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation, and two members - prosecutors of the Supreme Cassation Prosecutor's Office, appointed by the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria. 117 et seq. and art. 153 of the Constitution are unfounded. The procedural commissions as state commissions from the point of view of the principles of the rule of law are independent. Guarantees for this are: 1. The way in which these commissions are formed; The representatives in these commissions are appointed by the highest state bodies, namely: the President, the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, as well as by the Chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General; 2. The composition of these commissions; It includes persons with high qualification and professional ethics and 3. Procedural guarantees against external interference, which include both the manner in which each of the commissions proceeds, as well as the materials on the basis of which the inspection is carried out.Regarding § 6 ZIDZDDBDS , with which a commission under Art. 4, para 1 has been established, the petitioners do not indicate which constitutional text or principle the disputed text contradicts. The provision of Art. 4 in its wording after the amendment with § 6 of the Amendments and Additions Act has been complied with. the interests of all political forces represented in parliament. Five members of this commission were elected by the National Assembly on the proposal of various parliamentary groups. In this situation, the representatives of the parliamentary opposition will have the same rights and access to information as the representatives of the parliamentary majority. In addition, the procedural commission is an independent body. It is not subject to the National Assembly or the Council of Ministers, which excludes any interference in decision-making. As for the commission under Art. 4d, para 1 of the law, it should be noted that in this part the provision of the law does not contradict Art. 8, Art. 117 et seq. And Art. 153 of the Constitution. According to Article 92, paragraph 1 and Article 93, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, the President embodies the unity of the nation and is directly elected. from the people. The President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General are appointed by the President on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council under the terms of Article 129 of the Constitution. It is obvious that the conditions for electing and dismissing these bodies ensure their independence and exclude the possibility of exercising them. By the way, the way of setting up this commission, which will make the final decision to disclose the information, creates guarantees for its objectivity and impartiality. The fact that two of the members of this commission are appointed by the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and two of the chief prosecutor in no way means that the provision of Article 4d, paragraph 1 of the law contradicts the principle of separation of powers, referred to in Article 8 of the Constitution. It does not contradict the norm of Article 153 of the Constitution. Neither the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation nor the Prosecutor General is empowered to add to the Constitution. Violation of the principle of separation of powers means in practice the seizure or reshuffling of constitutional functions between the various authorities. The Constitutional Court has had occasion to rule in connection with the separation of powers and the interaction between them. In this direction is Decision № 6 of 22.04.1993 under c.d. № 4/93 (promulgated, SG, issue 36/93). It states: “The legal and political content of the term“ separation of powers ”consists in the fact that the state power has three main spheres of manifestation, assigned to three main systems of bodies, which are relatively independent of each other and function in a certain interrelation. We are talking about the three main functions of state power, ie. differentiation of competence between the three groups of bodies, and not some triviality excluded in the governance of the modern state… The scientific explanation requires that account be taken of the fact that there is no "Chinese wall" between the various authorities, that they interact with each other and that ultimately are manifestations of unified state power and sovereignty. This is the idea enshrined in Article 8 of the Constitution. ”The procedural commission, despite the fact that magistrates are appointed in it, does not have the powers of a judicial body. It is also not a body of the executive branch. Its powers are control. The President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General do not appoint from their system other bodies of the executive power, ie. they do not appoint the commission as a collegial body of the executive power, but appoint separate representatives in it. In this case it is about interaction between the authorities, which according to the case law of the Constitutional Court is a manifestation of the unified state power and sovereignty. Moreover, appointments in these cases are made by bodies outside the judiciary, such as the President and the National Assembly. To accept the opposite, namely that the participation of magistrates in bodies outside the judiciary is unconstitutional, means that elections in which magistrates participated were held in violation of the Constitution. The Constitution does not contain provisions prohibiting the participation of magistrates in structures outside the judiciary. In the specific case they do not carry out judicial activity. The participation of magistrates in the commission under art. 4d, para 1 of the law, ie.The participation of members of the independent judiciary in this commission together with the President's representative creates guarantees for its impartiality, objectivity and independence. There is no obstacle for the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General to be assigned separate powers by special laws. The Constitution does not exhaustively regulate their powers. On the request for establishing the unconstitutionality of § 7 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, a new Article 4e has been created, according to paragraph 1 of which “the Minister of the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Director of the National Intelligence Service and the Director of the National Security Service set up working groups in the administrative units and services headed by them, which contain documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate assessment of the documents stored in the respective service, il and which have been handed over to them by natural and legal persons in accordance with Article 2. The claim of the petitioners that the working groups under Article 4e, paragraph 1, given that they are established by ministers and heads of other departments, representatives of the ruling political formation will carry out party orders, it is unfounded. It is logical and legally justified to create process working groups in the relevant departments, where the relevant information funds are stored. On the one hand, the persons included in these commissions are professionals in their field, and on the other hand, they are civil servants who, according to the provision of Article 4 of the Civil Servant Act, are politically neutral and are guided in the performance of their duties. In addition, it should be noted that the members of these working groups should give some assessment of specific official documents in relation to the circumstances to which they relate, explicitly stated in the law, and not to a free interpretation of these circumstances. The working groups perform only preparatory work, and the decisions are taken by the commission under Art. 4d, para 1. The Law for amendment and supplement of the VAT Act contains sufficient guarantees for the objectivity and impartiality of the bodies that will apply the law, including the procedural ones. working groups. In this direction is the provision of Art. 6d, created by § 11 of the Law on Public Procurement. Regarding the allegations that the Law on Public Procurement contradicts Article 4, paragraph 2, Article 32, paragraph 2, Article 38 and Article 56 of the Constitution, as and the principles set out in the preamble that the Basic Law protects citizens from discrediting, from damaging their name, honor and dignity. The Law amending the VAT Act complies with the reasons of Decision мо 10 of 22.09.1997 of the Constitutional Court under Art. .e. № 14/97 on the compliance of this law with the constitutionally guaranteed right of citizens to receive information and the constitutionally established obligation of the state to defend citizens from encroachment on their honor, dignity and good name. The right of citizens to receive information is a fundamental constitutional right , enshrined in Article 41, paragraph 1, assoc. 1 of the Constitution. A number of international acts, to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party, create obligations for protection of the right of access to information. Fundamental international legal instruments in this regard are: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of Europe and the Recommendations of Resolution 1096 of the Council of Europe. first session in 1946. The UN General Assembly unanimously adopted a Resolution on Freedom of Information, which reads: "The right to information is a fundamental human right and is a condition for all the freedoms to which the United Nations aspires." have worked in the special security bodies (DS, RU of the General Staff) of the totalitarian state, is an expression of the right of citizens and society to receive information. This right of citizens to receive information, enshrined in Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, cannot come into conflict with the constitutional restrictions of this right, explicitly written in Prov. 2 of Art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution. In the specific case ZIDZDDBDS, which is in compliance with the above-mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 14/97, regulates both the conditions and the order for disclosure of the information and besides creates guarantees for protection of the rights, provided in art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution, which in practice realizes the idea of ​​balance of interests. Strictly regulated rules have been established, which guarantee the independence of the bodies for conducting the respective inspection (the commissions are not in the structures of the legislative, executive or judicial power), which is a condition for impartiality and objectivity of the information. The constitutional right of the inspected persons to defend themselves against the incorrect decisions of the inspection bodies is guaranteed. In this way the danger of political and public discrediting is excluded, as well as the attempts to manipulate and blackmail individual citizens by distorting the facts. the above-cited decision of the Constitutional Court, in principle belonging to the former State Security does not affect the good name of the inspected persons. This is because a large part of the former State Security staff worked to protect the interests of the state. Many of them continue to cooperate with the current security services and the law protects them - Article 3, paragraph 2 of the Law on Security and Security of the Republic of Bulgaria. Nevertheless, the public has formed an opinion that such cooperation is reprehensible. However, the law does not create a collective presumption of reprehensibility of certain categories of activities, but creates conditions for establishing the specific activity of a certain person, namely whether he cooperated with the repressive authorities by transmitting information about dissidents, innocent people, contributing in this way to their political persecution by the repressive authorities, and ultimately whether this person benefited from this activity. The Constitutional Court considers that disclosing the names of Bulgarian citizens who cooperated with the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff does not harm their good name, honor and dignity, because with the activities they carried out as collaborators, they predetermined the fate of thousands of innocent people. Justice as another basic principle in law requires society to know who served the repressive authorities are accomplices in the persecution and repression of thousands of innocent people Depending on this, as indicated above, strictly regulated rules have been created in the AML / CFT Act, which guarantee impartiality and objectivity of the exported information. However, given that the disclosure of such information will affect a certain range of persons and will violate their constitutional rights, it is the duty of the legislator to ensure to the greatest extent the truthfulness and objectivity of the disclosed information. This direction is both the procedure for establishing the relevant facts of the case, as well as ensuring the right to defense. The establishment of affiliation to the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff is indisputable, provided in Article 5 in the wording of § 8 of the AML / CFT Act. According to Article 5a in the wording of § 9 of the AML / CFT the registration diary of the respective service, but for which documents under Art. 5, para 2 and 3 are missing. ”The statement is unfounded. One of the merits of the law is that it does not impose by law a certain moral conclusion, but aims to disclose sufficient data................................... in order for each citizen to be able to judge from the point of view of his morals and views, in each case whether the activity performed was worthy of respect or was reprehensible. In the stated considerations the Constitutional Court considers that the Act does not harm honor, dignity and goodness. name of the citizens, due to which it does not contradict art. 4, para 2 and art. 38 of the Constitution and the principles, indicated in the preamble of the Constitution. In this part the request is unfounded and should be left without respect. As for the statement of the petitioners about the contradiction of the law with the provision of art. 32, para 2 of the Constitution, the same is untenable. The Law for amendment and supplement of provides for monitoring, photographing, filming, recording of persons whose names will be disclosed under the terms and conditions provided therein, due to which the claim of the petitioners for contradiction of the law with Article 32, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is irrelevant to the dispute. is the request of the petitioners to establish the contradiction of the law with the provision of art. 56 of the Constitution, as the persons, whose names are included in the report under art. 3, para 1, item 3, have the protection provided in the law itself. is expressed in several directions: 1. As stated above, the establishment of affiliation with the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff is undisputed. In no case is it considered that the affiliation of individuals to the special services is established unquestionably on the basis of data alone. in the reference file or in the registration log of the respective service.2. The right to protection is exercised with the participation of the inspected person in the work of the commission under art. 4, para 1, thus he can frustrate the export of the information even before it is included in the report of the commission. According to art. 5 , para 3, item 6 in the wording of § 8 ZIDZDDBDS is provided in a certain hypothesis, when there is insufficient evidence, the person can be invited by the commission under art. 4, para 1 to get acquainted with the documents and data and to give a handwritten explanation.3. A form of protection is also the obligation of the standing committee to submit a report to the National Assembly on the activities performed by it in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 4 of the law. In this way parliamentary control over the activity of this commission is exercised.4. The inspected person may also defend himself against the disclosure of false data. According to the provision of Article 6d in the wording of § 11 of the law, “the persons whose names are included in the report under Article 3, paragraph 1, item 3 in contradiction with this law, may file against the commission under art. 4, para 1 a claim for compensation by the order of the Law for the responsibility of the state for damages, caused to citizens ”, which is in accordance with the requirement of art. 7 of the Constitution. to the petitioners that the term “beneficiaries” used in § 7, § 8, § 21 and others. of the Law on Public Procurement was so "stretchy" that it allowed for subjective assessment, which would discredit the persons subject to this assessment, is unfounded. In the provision of Article 5, paragraph 2, item 3 in its wording of § 8 of the Law listed the documents that should be taken into account when establishing the quality of a "beneficiary" within the meaning of this law. These persons, as well as all others, as indicated above, have judicial protection under Article 6d in the wording This provision does not contradict Article 4, paragraph 2 and Article 38 of the Constitution. The claim of the petitioners that with § 3, which amended Article 2, § 5, cannot be accepted as justified. , which amended Art. 3, para. 1, item 1 and § 8, which amended Art. 5, para. 2, item 1, item 2, item 3 of the Law on Public Procurement, arbitrary interpretations of the written evidence and thus a person appearing in any documents may be maligned despite the fact that there is no evidence of co-operation. The VAT Act exhaustively lists in detail the documents on the basis of which it should be established whether the person was a full-time employee, part-time employee or a beneficiary and these documents fully comply with the definitions given in § 1 of the additional provisions of the law. of § 21 of the AML / CFT Act. The legislator has even created an explicit protection of persons in respect of whom there is insufficient data to establish their affiliation to the former State Security or to the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff. This matter is regulated in the newly created provision of art. 5a in the wording of § 9 of the law. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of § 23 of the additional provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Freedoms of Children with Art. 6 of the Constitution According to the provision of art. 6, para 1 of the Constitution “All people are born free and equal in dignity and rights”. Paragraph 2 of the same article states that “all people are equal before the law. No restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political affiliation, personal and social status or property status are allowed. ”It is not clear from the applicants' considerations. which of the constitutional grounds listed in the text of Art. 6 contradicts the provision of § 23 of the Law on Public Procurement? § 2a has been created with the provisions of § 23 of the additional provisions of the Law on Public Procurement, which regulates the two hypotheses: 1, and of “public activity” - para 1, item 2. With the second paragraph of § 2a the legislator has accepted, “that the performance of activity as a full-time or part-time associate of an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service is incompatible with the occupation of public office within the meaning of para 1, item 1 ”. If it is assumed that the allegations of the petitioners are aimed at establishing the unconstitutionality of § 2a, para 2 of the additional provisions of the law, the Constitutional t court considers that they are unfounded.1. The legislator has in mind the incompatibility of the public position held by the persons under para 1 of § 2a and the performance of activity as a full-time or part-time associate of an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service, so it cannot be argued that the persons under para 1 of § 2a, holding a “public office”, are limited in their choice to work as a full-time or part-time employee in the relevant security services. And this is because each person holding the relevant “public office” must decide for himself whether to continue to perform This position does not in any way limit the rights under Article 6 of the Constitution of persons holding a “public office” in the state, because this is not the only case of legislative incompatibility of activities. In this sense are the provisions of Article 132 of the Judiciary Act, Article 7 of the Civil Servant Act and Article 41 of the Local Self-Government Act. To accept the opposite, it follows that all these texts of the three laws are unconstitutional. Obviously, this case also concerns legislative expediency.2. The argument that the provision of § 2a, para 2, created by § 23 of the Law on Public Procurement, does not contradict Art. 6 of the Constitution can be sought in the very incompatibility between the activity that the persons as public figures in the hypothesis of § 2, para 1, item 1 of the law carry out and the activity that they could perform as collaborators of the special security services. It is vitally and legally unreasonable for the persons who perform the public positions referred to in § 2a, para 1, item 1 to perform activities as collaborators of the special security services, moreover, that in all cases the work in these services is strictly Confidential. In the case of dependence, which in any case arises in view of the nature of work in special security services, public figures could hardly fulfill their constitutional and legal obligations for the public positions they hold. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of § 5, with which has been amended Art. 3 in its part of para 1, item 2 of the Amendments and Supplements Act with a preamble, Art. 1 and Art. 9 of the ConstitutionAccording to paragraph 4 of the preamble of the Constitution the Constitutional Legislator is The provision of Article 9 of the Constitution raises the duty of the armed forces to guarantee the sovereignty, security and independence of the country and to protect its territorial integrity. The allegations of the petitioners that the disclosure of the names на Bulgarian citizens who were full - time or part - time collaborators of the former State Security or of the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, or beneficiaries of the former State Security, or of the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff within the meaning of Article 3, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Law on State Security directly affects the national security of the state and thus contradicts of the preamble and Article 9 of the Constitution is unfounded.1. The Law for amendment and supplement of the VAT Act does not deny the continuity in the specialized services.2. The law creates sufficient guarantees for the protection of national security. In this direction are the provisions of art. 3, para 2, item 1 and item 2 and para. 4 of the law in the wording after their amendment with § 5 of the Act, as well as the provisions of art. 4e, para 3, item 1 and para 4, and art. 4g after their creation with § 7 of the Act. regulations do not disclose the names of persons who were full-time or part-time collaborators of the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, but who still perform relevant activities in the intelligence and counterintelligence of the state.3. The petitioners' argument that the disclosure of the "files" will discredit many Bulgarian and foreign citizens, former collaborators of our intelligence and counterintelligence services and this will lead to many lawsuits against the Republic of Bulgaria in the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg is untenable, as there is no request on the part of the petitioners under Art. 149, para 1, item 4 of the Constitution, namely that the AML / CFT Act does not comply with generally recognized norms of international law and international treaties to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party. concerns the specifically raised assertion that § 5, which amended Art. 3 in the part of para 1, item 2 of the law contradicts Art. 1 of the Constitution, the same is untenable. The mentioned provision does not have as its subject the constitutional form of government of our state, as well as the basic principles on which state power is built, due to which the claim of the petitioners for its contradiction with Article 1 of the Constitution is irrelevant to the dispute. here are the petitioners for contradiction of the provision of art. 3, para 2, b. “F” in the wording of § 5 of the Law on Criminal Procedure in the part “or against him there is or has been subsequently initiated and terminated preliminary proceedings for such a crime” According to the provision of Article 31, paragraph 3 of the Constitution the accused is presumed innocent until Indeed, the provision of Art. 3, para. 2, item “e” in the wording of § 5 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights does not provide as a consequence that the persons against whom there is or has been initiated and subsequently initiated preliminary proceedings for a serious crime under the Criminal Code, should be considered guilty or convicted of the crime for which preliminary proceedings were instituted against them and the same was terminated. But to put these persons in the same category with persons convicted of a serious crime under the Penal Code, and to suffer the legal consequences of such a conviction, namely to disclose their names as full-time and part-time collaborators of the State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of Gen. The General Staff, although they were collaborators of the respective intelligence or counterintelligence services, it is obvious that in this part the attacked provision contradicts the norm of art. 31, para 3 of the Constitution. The procedural provision also contradicts the norm of art. 117, para .2 of the Constitution, as it calls into question the legality and fairness of the respective acts for termination of the criminal proceedings, issued by the independent judiciary. In these judgments the Constitutional Court considers that on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of The Constitution should establish the unconstitutionality of Article 3, paragraph 2, item “e” in the wording of § 5 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the attacked part. From the above it is clear that with regard to all other texts specifically are the subject of the written request, as well as the others, which the court ex officio checked, the request of the group of MPs as unfounded should be rejected. and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Declares unconstitutional the provision of § 5 of the Law on Public Procurement Act (promulgated, SG, issue 24 of 13.03.2001), which amends Article 3 of the VAT Act in the part of para 2, b. "F" regarding the text "or there is or has been initiated and subsequently initiated preliminary proceedings for such a crime". Rejects the request of 54 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of all other provisions of the Act.
JUDGMENT № 15Sofia, 31 May 2001constitutional case № 3/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Stefanka Stoyanova (Promulgated, SG, issue 53 of 12 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova - Rapporteur, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted on 1.II.2001 at the request of 70 MPs from The request disputes the constitutionality of provisions of the Hunting and Game Protection Act (ZLOD) - SG, issue 78 of 28.IX.2000, namely: Art. 4, Art. 7, para 1, Article 29, Article 30 and Article 31. The court with a ruling of 22. ІІ. In 2001 it admitted the request for consideration on the merits and constituted as interested parties the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, the Commission for Protection of Competition, the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria, the Union of Foresters in Bulgaria and the Animal protection. Written opinions were submitted by all interested parties within the term given by the court, except for the Commission for Protection of Competition and the Society for the Protection of Animals. Written opinions were also received from the Union for Nature Protection and the Society of Foresters and Researchers. The court discussed the request, assessed the considerations contained in it and in the submitted written statements, and in order to rule, took into account the following: Under Article 4 of the Law on Hunting, according to Article 4 of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the hunting area is organized. , the management of the hunting farm and the control of the game management. According to the request, the provision contradicts Article 4, paragraph 2, Article 5, paragraph 1 and Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It is alleged that it establishes a monopoly position and does not create conditions for free development of civil society, as it assigns the listed activities to only one legal entity and excludes the participation of the public organization of hunters. The request is supported in some opinions - the Union of hunters and fishermen in Bulgaria, the Union for Nature Protection and the Society of Foresters and Scientists. The other opinions maintain that it is unfounded. The court finds the request unfounded. The activities assigned by the disputed provision of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry are divided into three groups. The type, character and essence of each of them can be determined on the basis of art. 7 - 12, art. 14 and art. 66 - 67 ZLOD. The content of these legal norms indicates that the activity of the first of the groups - the organization of the hunting area, is not limited to the distribution of hunting areas. It also includes the establishment of state game breeding stations, among the tasks of which is the preservation and enrichment of the species diversity of the game, as well as its protection related to the construction of hunting facilities, the use of forests by the state forest fund for habitat improvement. The same legal norms also indicate that the activity under the other two groups covers the management and control of the protection of the game, its protection and maintenance of the environment necessary for its normal life activity. In view of the above, the court accepts that their implementation is implementation. of the constitutional obligation of the state to ensure the maintenance and diversity of living nature. This obligation derives from Article 15 of the Basic Law. Protecting forests and game is an important part of it. Their protection imposes the requirement for normative regulation of the relations in this direction and for determination of institutions, which are assigned the functions, following from the normative regulation and ensuring its observance. Precisely because the obligation is to the state, it can be determined by the supreme legislative body. such institutions. The existence of the same requirement justifies para 4 of art. 17 of the Constitution. With it, the regime of the objects of state property is reserved for legal regulation. In addition to the acquisition and disposal, the regime of property objects also covers their management. As the game is state property - art. 2, para 1 ZLOD, the settlement of the regime of this object of ownership also refers to the determination of the subject, from which the management and control functions of the management will be exercised. The pointed constitutional requirement is observed with the contested provision. It is, on the one hand, part of the legal regulation of the relations related to the protection of the game and, on the other hand, specifies the legal entity to which the activities for the implementation of the noted constitutional obligation of the state are assigned. It does not violate Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law. The functions, which with this provision are assigned to the legal entity determined by it, have organizational, managerial and control character. They do not constitute an economic activity. Therefore, their assignment to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is not an establishment of a monopoly position and does not violate the principle of equality of economic entities. There is no violation of Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. Civil society is a human community that is free from the political guardianship of the state. Structurally, it covers various organizations and corporations, including non-profit associations. One of the main prerequisites for its construction and for ensuring its stable development is the right of citizens to associate freely and voluntarily. There is an obligation for the state to create conditions for free development of civil society - Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The contested provision is without prejudice to the performance of that obligation. It does not contain any obstacles to the exercise of the right of association (formation of associations, determination of their goals and development of the activity for which they are registered). It is true that the activities listed in Article 4 of ZLOD are assigned only to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and thus the participation of civil society structures in them is excluded. However, this does not justify another conclusion. As already pointed out, the organization of the hunting area, the management of the hunting farm and the control of game management are activities, the implementation of which is fulfillment, albeit partial, of a constitutional obligation - to ensure maintenance and diversity. of wildlife. As this obligation belongs to the state, the issue of providing certain functions to the structures of the civil society can and should be resolved by it in the normative regulation of the relations in this direction, and when it is necessary. The Constitution does not provide for any requirements in relation to resolving this issue. Whether such functions will be assigned and if so - what will be their type and scope and to which of the associations will be provided, is the exclusive competence of the legislator. In this case the legislative assessment is for inclusion of hunting associations in the circle of the subjects, from which the game is managed, but not in the circle of those, from which the management and control activities under art. 4 ZLOD are exercised. The Court did not find that this distribution of activities between the various subjects affected constitutional values. At the same time, it notes that the management of the game, covering the activities explicitly mentioned in Art. 37, Art. 46, para 4, Art. 68, para 4, Art. 78, para 1 ZLOD, is also part of the implementation of the stated constitutional obligation of the state. Insofar as the participation in them contributes to the activation and expansion of the functions of the respective associations in their interaction with state institutions, their assignment contributes to the development of civil society. As not contradicting the discussed constitutional norms, the disputed provision is not inconsistent with Art. , para 1 of the Constitution. Therefore, the request in this part should be rejected. Under Art. 7, para 1 ZLOD The provision of Art. 7, para 1 ZLOD allows the distribution of the hunting area in the hunting economic regions to be carried out regardless of the fund borders and the ownership of the lands, forests and water areas. The request states that the same provision contradicts Article 17 of the Constitution, as it restricts the rights of forest owners. The request is not supported in the submitted written statements. The court considers the request unfounded in this part as well. When separating the hunting areas under the manner provided for in Article 7, paragraph 1 of ZLOD, they undoubtedly include forests owned by individuals. Therefore, game management is also carried out in these forests. However, its implementation is not provided to the owners, but to the persons listed in Article 34 ZLOD - state game breeding stations, scientific institutes and universities, whose scientific and educational activities are related to forestry and hunting, hunting associations that are duly registered and unite hunting teams from neighboring hunting regions, and other Bulgarian legal entities. They exercise rights (under Art. 46, para. 4, Art. 68, para. 4 ZLOD) and perform obligations (under Art. 37, Art. 68, para. 3, Art. 78 ZLOD), which is related to the use of forest areas for passage, stay, construction of hunting facilities and other activities covered by game management. The regulation thus adopted does not violate the constitutional requirement for legal protection of the right to property (Art. 17, para. 1) and the constitutional principle of inviolability of private property (Art. 17, para. 3). This principle does not exclude the legal possibility for restriction of private property and its content is not equivalent to the establishment of an absolute prohibition on such restrictions. The conclusion is confirmed by the circumstance that after the proclamation of this principle the Constitution (art. 17, para 5) allows under certain conditions the compulsory expropriation of property. It is also confirmed by the fact that the Constitution establishes priorities (for example protection and reproduction of the environment - art. 15, preservation of arable land for agricultural purposes - art. 21, protection of the national historical and cultural heritage - art. 23), protection of which is related to property restrictions. At the same time, it should be added that the noted constitutional requirement under Article 17, paragraph 1 is to guarantee and protect by law the right to property within the limits within which it can be exercised. These boundaries are important for outlining the essence of the law itself. According to Article 57, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law, they are determined by the rights and legitimate interests of other legal entities, whose impact the constitutional norm does not allow. The above should be taken into account when assessing the constitutionality of the disputed provision. The delineation of the hunting economic regions is connected with the establishment of state game breeding stations, the activity of which is the preservation of the game diversity and the preservation of the genetic fund. In addition, the delineation of these areas is a prerequisite for the organization of game management, which also includes activities for conservation and enrichment of species diversity. In view of the subject-matter of the activities, the area in which they are exercised by the entities concerned cannot, of course, be dependent on forest ownership. The activities, aimed at achieving the protection of game as a national treasure, protect a constitutional value under Article 15 - the maintenance and diversity of wildlife. It is the provision of its protection and the ownership of the game that justify the distribution of the hunting area in the manner provided for in Art. 7, para 1 ZLOD. They make the restrictions imposed by this distribution constitutionally permissible, all the more so as these restrictions are balanced by the rights of the persons concerned regulated in other provisions - some of their obligations for game management can be fulfilled by the respective legal entities only after concluding a contract with the owners. of forests (art. 38 ZLOD), the latter are due compensation for the damages from the game (art. 79 ZLOD), they are entitled to part of the funds of the national fund “Bulgarian forest” when their forests fall in the area of ​​the state game breeding stations (Article 95, item 47 of the Forest Act). That is why the request must be rejected in this part. Under Art. 29, 30 and 31 ZLODThree provisions regulate the association of persons who have acquired the right to hunt. According to Article 29 of ZLOD, these persons may unite in hunting teams. When uniting them in hunting teams with neighboring hunting economic regions, according to Art. 30 ZLOD they establish hunting associations, which are legal entities registered under the terms and conditions of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities (LNPO) - SG, issue 81 of 6. X.2000, which repealed Articles 134 - 154 of the Law on Persons and the Family. For the latter, in turn, Article 31 of the ZLOD allows to establish on a voluntary basis regional hunting associations and a national hunting association, which are legal entities without the right to economic activity and which are also registered under the terms and conditions of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities. the request maintains that they contradict Article 44 of the Constitution because they “prescribe new forms of association against the will of the hunters” and, by seizing the activities of an existing organization, have the effect of “forcibly destroying civil society structures”. It is also maintained that they are in contradiction with Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as they exclude the regional hunting associations and the national hunting association from the subjects of economic activity. The written opinions of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers are unfounded. the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry and the Union of Foresters in Bulgaria. In the other written statements - of the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria, the Union for Nature Protection and the Society of Foresters and Researchers, the request is supported. The court considers that the disputed provisions do not infringe the constitutional right of association. They do not create an obligation for membership, but presuppose a voluntary grouping of persons who have acquired the right to hunt. The conclusion follows from the fact that they allow the establishment of associations without membership in the same associations being set as a condition for participation in hunting. Therefore, the voluntary nature of the association is not violated. On the contrary - it is guaranteed by other provisions that ensure the exercise of this right (§ 3, para. 4 of the transitional and final provisions of ZLOD) and at the same time explicitly regulate hunting by persons who have acquired the right to hunt but are not members of a hunting association (Art. .51 THIEF). The freedom of association has not been violated either, because without thwarting it and without hindering in any way its manifestation, art. 29-31 ZLOD explicitly recognize and guarantee the right of organization. It is true that with the thus adopted regulation the obligatory membership in a certain organization of hunters and the raising of the membership legal relationship in condition for acquiring and exercising the right to hunt are abolished. However, dropping them is not a ban on membership in this organization. Therefore, it does not affect the voluntary and free association of those who have the right to hunt, who can and must decide for themselves whether to terminate or continue their membership. The creation of this opportunity by excluding the obligation to membership ensures, as indicated, the voluntary nature of the association. It is also true that it is the hunting associations under Article 30 ZLOD are among the legal entities from which the game is managed (Art. 34 ZLOD). ). However, this does not mean the creation of a situation which benefits one association at the expense of others and thus violates the freedom of association. Participation in game management is an opportunity for various legal entities, their range, including "other Bulgarian legal entities" is wide and their selection is done through competition or by negotiation (Articles 34 - 36 ZLOD). It follows from the above that the exercise of the activity of management is not a privilege of one organization, limiting the activity of other organizations, and hence the right of association. On the other hand, the adoption of this legislation, expanding the range of entities that can be granted game management, is not a forced seizure of the activities of an existing organization of hunters and deprivation of their right to associate. Since the game is state property and its management, including its protection and enrichment of species diversity, is a fulfillment of a constitutional obligation of the state under Article 15, it may make changes in the entities to which it assigns its functions in this direction. In this case, the implementation of such a change is not accompanied by a ban or termination of an organization, reduction of its membership or encroachment on its property. Therefore, its implementation does not violate the voluntary and free association. .19, ал.2) for equal legal conditions for economic activity of all citizens and legal entities. The established hunting associations are not deprived of the opportunity to carry out economic activity. They can carry it out within and under the conditions of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities, which means that this activity must have the marks under para 3 of art. 3 of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities and the legal entities must not distribute profit according to para 6 of art. Without the right to such activity are only the higher organizational structures formed by them - regional hunting associations and national hunting association. The exclusion of these structures from the economic activity does not lead to inequality under Art. 19, para 2 of the Basic Law. The same structures are not assigned game management functions. Their construction is not even obligatory, but when they are established, they are formed by associations under Article 30 ZLOD. Therefore, their composition includes organizations for each of which it is permissible to carry out business activities. In view of this, it cannot be considered that the associations in national or regional hunting associations are not provided with equal legal conditions within the meaning of the said constitutional norm. For these reasons and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of The Constitution The Constitutional Court DECIDES: Rejects the request of 70 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly to declare the unconstitutionality of Art. 4, Art. 7, para 1 and Art. 29, 30 and 31 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act - SG, issue 78 of 28.IX.2000.
JUDGMENT № 16Sofia, 12 June 2001constitutional case № 6/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Georgi Markov (Promulgated, SG No. 56/22/2001) Member State: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov - rapporteur, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted on March 9, 2001 at the request of 59 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly. It is requested to establish the unconstitutionality of the following provisions of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (LSBRB for 2001) - SG, issue 108/2000, namely: of Art. the part under item 1.11.1., 5.1.1. and 5.2.1 .; Article 2, paragraph 1, item II, para 2, para 5 in the part regarding the word “overfulfillment” and para 8; Article 9, paragraphs 1 and 2; Article 10, paragraph 1; Article 11, paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 5; Art. 13, para 4 and 5 in the part regarding the words “the bodies of the judiciary”, “and the mayors”, “art. 2, para 2” and “art. 9, para 2”; § 9; § 20; § 22, para 2 and 3; § 26; § 30; § 35, para 2; § 37 of the transitional and final provisions and Annexes № 3 and № 4 of the same law. It is also requested to establish the inconsistency of the challenged provisions, referring to the municipal budgets, with the principles of the European Charter of Local Self-Government. By order of 15.03.2001 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits. With the same definition as interested parties in the case The following are constituted: the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works, the Supreme Judicial Council, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria. , The Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Supreme Judicial Council and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Finance plead for the rejection of the requests in full. The Supreme Judicial Council (SJC) maintains that the provisions of Art. 2, para. 1, item II and para. 2 of the Law on Municipalities for 2001 are unconstitutional. The National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria is in favor of respecting the request regarding the provisions related to budgets of the municipalities. The Constitutional Court, after considering the considerations developed in the request, the opinions of the parties, as well as the evidence attached to the case, accepted the following: I. Regarding the unconstitutionality of the provisions of the Law on the Judiciary for 2001, referring to the budget of the judiciary. Under Art. 2, para. 1, item II. , art. 130 and art. 131 of the Constitution. Indeed, with Decision № 17/1995 under c.d. № 13/95 (SG, issue 93/95) The Constitutional Court has given a mandatory interpretation of the Basic Law in the sense that the SJC has an independent budget, which is voted by the National Assembly in its entirety as the budget of a body of the judiciary. It is stated that any law on the annual state budget of the country, which lacks funds for certain constitutionally established state institutions, can be declared unconstitutional, as it paralyzes their activities. By the same decision the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional the refusal of the Parliament to include in the law on the state budget for the respective year on an independent order the budget of the SJC. The Constitutional Court does not abandon its principled opinion expressed in the above interpretative decision, that the SJC has a budget that is an integral part of the budget of the judiciary, but is independent of the budgets of the other, judicial bodies of that system. In this case, however, the court held that the impugned legal provision, which adopted the budget of the judiciary for 2001, did not deprive the SJC of funds for current expenses and did not paralyze its activities. There is practically no refusal on the part of the parliament to provide funds for the functioning of this constitutionally established state body. This is also evident from the will of the legislator in adopting the provision in question in the plenary hall. Funds for running costs for the SJC are included in the total running costs for the entire judiciary. In allocating the budget of the judiciary to the relevant bodies, the SJC allocates the planned and necessary funds for its functioning. Due to the fact that the State Budget Law for 2001 provides funds for the normal functioning of the SJC, although they are not described separately. position), which would be more precise from the point of view of the basic law, the provision of art. 2, para 1, item II is not unconstitutional. Under art. 2, para 2. The attacked provision of art. 2, para .2 The State Budget Law for 2001 approves a subsidy from the budget of the judiciary in the amount of 90% of the determined amount under para 1, as the remaining 10% shall be provided only in case the approved with art. 1, para 3 is not exceeded. budget deficit. According to the applicants, Article 8 and Article 117, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Basic Law were thus violated. The Constitutional Court held that there had been no violation of the principles of separation of powers and independence of the judiciary, enshrined in Article 8 and 117, para 2 of the Constitution. With the provision of art. 1, para. 2 of the State Budget Law for 2001 an independent budget of the independent judiciary was adopted, which is in full compliance with art. 117, para. 3 of the basic law. Sovereign right of the National Assembly under art. 84 , item 2 of the Constitution is when adopting the state budget to determine the manner and conditions of receiving the subsidy of all state bodies, including those of the judiciary. There is no constitutional norm that restricts the legislature on this issue. That is why Art. 2, para. 2 of the LSBRB for 2001 is not unconstitutional. Under Art. 2, para. 5, in the part regarding the word “overfulfillment” According to Art. of the revenues from fees from the activity of the bodies of the judiciary is at the expense of the republican budget. The applicants attacked the provision only with regard to the word “overfulfillment”, considering that Article 117, paragraph 3 of the Constitution had been violated due to interference in the independent budget of the independent judiciary. With Decision № 18/1993 under c.d. № 19/1993 (SG, issue 1/94) The Constitutional Court has accepted that the judiciary is supported by the budget. The sources of funds necessary for balancing the annual expenditures voted by the Parliament are raised through the revenue part of the republican budget. The legal regulation of the sources of funds by origin, basis and distribution is contained in the relevant structural law on the budget, which is also adopted by the parliament. It should be borne in mind that the independence of the budget of the judiciary does not violate the budgetary powers of the supreme legislative body - the National Assembly. Therefore, there is no constitutional obstacle to the overfulfillment of revenues from fees from the judiciary at the expense of the national budget. . Moreover, the non-fulfillment of the envisaged revenues from fees from the activity of these bodies is also at the expense of the republican budget. In this sense is also Decision № 15/1997 under c.d. № 9/1997 - SG, issue 101/97. In view of the above, the challenged provision is not unconstitutional. Under Art. 2, para 8C this legal norm is provided in the cases when the bodies of the judiciary are housed in buildings - state or municipal property, they do not pay rent. The submitters of the request consider that there is a violation of the principle of the rule of law - Art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution, as the lease legal relations are always remunerative. According to the Constitution the state properties are managed and managed in the interest of the citizens and the society - art. 18, para 6 of the basic law. The regime of the objects of state and municipal property, on the other hand, is determined by the law - art. 17, para 4 of the Constitution. The legislator has considered that it is in the interest of the citizens and the society that the judicial bodies, housed in state and municipal buildings, not to pay sums for their use. Obviously, the National Assembly has chosen an approach that it deems most appropriate from the point of view of the process. of drawing up and execution of the state budget. There are no expenditures in the budget of the judiciary for the payment of rents in cases where the budget revenues of other bodies from these rents would be reflected in the amount of the subsidy. It should be borne in mind that the interests of the state and municipalities can not to be measured only in cash income from the rental of the building stock, which is state or municipal property. The legislator has considered that the public interest requires the judiciary to be close to the population of the respective settlement. In view of the above, Article 2, paragraph 8 of the State Budget Law for 2001. it is not unconstitutional. II. Regarding the unconstitutionality of the provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001, referring to the budgets of the municipalities under Art. 1, para 2, in the part of items 1.11.1., 5.1.1., 5.2.1. and art. 9, para 1 and 2 and Appendix № 3С item 1.11.1. of Art. 1, para 2 of the State Budget Law for 2001, targeted social benefits to the municipalities in the amount of BGN 60,000.0 are envisaged, and in item 5.1.1. of the same provision a subsidy for them in the amount of BGN 537,892.2. With item 5.2.1. of the attacked provision the contributions from the municipalities (net) are determined at BGN 56,361.3. With art. 9, para 1 of the law are accepted by methodology according to Appendix № 3 the amounts of the net relations of a certain amount in the form of general and targeted subsidies and contributions and unallocated expenditures in the republican budget. Paragraph 2 of the same article approves a subsidy to the municipalities in the amount of 90% of the amounts determined under para 1 without the targeted subsidies for social benefits, as the remaining 10% is provided only in case the approved with art. 1 is not exceeded. , para 3 of the law budget deficit. According to the petitioners the texts in question are unconstitutional because they violate the independence of municipal budgets, which is a distinctive feature of local self-government - Article 141, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. They consider that the law does not provide funds for the normal functioning of the municipalities. The Constitutional Court accepts that the above provisions do not violate the Constitution. With the provisions of art. 2, para 1, item 1.11.1. and 5.1.1. targeted social benefits and subsidies to the municipalities, the legislator has fulfilled its obligation under Article 141, paragraph 3 of the Basic Law. According to this constitutional provision, the state is obliged to support the municipalities, including through funds from the state budget. On the other hand, subsidies and contributions are an element of budgetary relations between the state and the municipalities. Through the mechanism of the methodology provided for in the law, a balance is achieved between national and local interests and protection of the financially weaker municipalities. In this sense is also Decision № 2/2001 under c.d. № 10/2000 (SG, issue 9/2001). Article 20 of the Constitution should also be taken into account, according to which the state is obliged to create conditions for balanced development of the separate regions of the country. 10, para 1 This provision stipulates that when compiling the municipal budgets for 2001 the amount of funds for social benefits under the Social Assistance Act and the Decree for Birth Promotion may not be less than twice the amount provided by Art. 9, para 1 targeted subsidies for social benefits. According to the applicants the adopted approach does not correspond to art. 47, para 1 and art. 51 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court accepts that art. 10, para 1 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is in accordance with the constitutional provisions in question. They explicitly state that the mother enjoys special protection of the state and that citizens have the right to social assistance. It should also be borne in mind that according to the preamble of the Basic Law, the Republic of Bulgaria is a welfare state. That is why the state can assign social functions to the municipalities by law. Neither from art. 47, para. 1, nor from art. 51 of the Constitution, to which the petitioners refer, follows the conclusion maintained by them that social assistance and care for children they are the sole responsibility of the state. Moreover, a number of constitutional provisions (Art. 51, para. 3 and Art. 52, para. 2) define the protection of those in need of social assistance as an obligation of both the state and society, from which they can undoubtedly not be excluded. municipalities. That is why the challenged legal provision does not contradict the Constitution. Under Art. 11, para 1, 2, 4 and 5, the legal texts in question regulate the manner of financing by the central government of the capital expenditures of the municipalities and the admissibility of internally compensated changes. that these provisions are in conflict with the constitutional principle of independence of municipal budgets. Their thesis is that the Minister of Finance cannot approve the budget estimates by approving the estimates for financing the capital expenditures of the municipalities, financed with funds from the target subsidy. It should be borne in mind that the state through budget funds and other way supports the normal activity of the municipalities - art. 141, para 3 of the Constitution. There is no obstacle from the point of view of the basic law the financial support of the municipalities to take place in specific cases in the form of targeted subsidies. The provision of targeted subsidies for the implementation of repair programs and projects is the result of a certain state policy. This follows from the provision of Article 20 of the Constitution, according to which the state creates conditions for balanced development of the individual regions of the country. In addition, the government manages the domestic policy of the country and the implementation of the state budget - Article 105, paragraph 1 and Article 106 of the Basic Law. In view of this, the powers of the Minister of Finance to approve the estimates for financing the capital expenditures of the municipalities, financed by the targeted subsidy, do not contradict the Constitution. Under Article 13, paragraphs 4 and 5 in part, regarding the words “the bodies of the judiciary, ”“ and the mayors ”,“ Art. 2, para 2 ”and“ Art. 9, para 2 ”According to these texts, the municipal councils approve priorities on which the funds received from their budget are spent, except for those with purpose. The mayors, on the other hand, may assume obligations for expenses in compliance with the restrictive conditions under Art. 2, para 2, Art. 3, para 2, Art. 4, para 3, Art. 6, para 2, Article 7, paragraph 2, Article 9, paragraph 2. The same applies to the bodies of the judiciary. According to the applicants, these provisions are in contradiction with Art. 7, para. 2 of the Municipal Budgets Act, and hence with Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 141, para 1 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court accepts that the independence of the municipal budgets does not mean that the legislator cannot introduce rules for the process of drawing up and implementation of municipal budgets. The National Assembly may adopt, as appropriate, restrictive norms with a view to more efficient control over the appropriate execution of expenditures. In this sense is also Decision № 2/2001 under c.d. № 10/2000. Therefore, the provision does not contradict the basic law. Under § 9; § 20; § 22, para 2 and 3; § 26; § 30; § 35, para 2 and § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001. According to § 9 and Annex № 4The relevant provisions determine the extra-budgetary accounts and funds for 2001. Thus, for example, item 1 of Annex № 4 creates Fund "Professional Qualification and Unemployment" at the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy. The compilation, implementation and reporting of the budget are state activities related to the management of the country (Decision № 11/1995 under Code of Civil Procedure № 14/95). - SG, issue 68/95). The Constitutional Court held that, as the supreme legislative body for the Parliament, there were no constitutional obstacles in the State Budget Law for 2001 to determine the extra-budgetary accounts and funds for the same year. In addition, the Constitution presupposes a balance between public and local interests. It is within the powers of the National Assembly to achieve this balance by legislative order - Art. 62 and Art. 84, item 2 of the Basic Law. Therefore, the attacked norms are not unconstitutional. According to § 20According to this provision, when budget institutions financed from the state budget, municipal budgets or extrabudgetary funds are housed in buildings owned by the state or municipalities, they do not pay rent. The Constitutional Court held that the provision was not unconstitutional for the reasons set out in the decision in connection with Article 2, paragraph 8 of the LDBRB for 2001. Under § 22, paragraphs 2 and 3, according to the applicants, the two provisions contradicted Article 141, para. 1 of the Basic Law. According to them, the municipal budget is independent only if the municipality acts autonomously in all its phases - compilation, adoption, implementation and reporting. Indeed, paragraph 2 of § 22 provides for the municipal budget to be compiled on the basis of the budget forecast by the General Tax Directorate for the tax revenues under the municipal budget for 2001. It should be emphasized that the independence of municipal budgets does not exclude the possibility of appropriate participation of the competent executive bodies in the process of both drawing up and implementing municipal budgets (Decision № 2/2001 under cd № 10/2000). The above also applies to para 3, according to which the overfulfillment, resp. the non-fulfillment of the tax revenues for 2001 is at the expense of the republican budget. The legislator has complied with its obligation under Article 141, paragraph 3 of the Constitution to support municipalities, including through funds from the state budget. Under § 26According to this provision the relative share of the contribution made by the municipality under Article 9, paragraph 1 to each reporting period of the year may not be lower than the relative amount of the incurred budget expenditures, including the expenditures for investments and current repairs to the budget credits for the same period of the year and higher than the installment approved by this law. from the municipalities are an element of the budgetary relations between them and the state. These contributions are used exclusively to support weaker municipalities. The provision is fully in accordance with Article 20 and Article 141, paragraph 3 of the Basic Law, according to which the state creates conditions for balanced development of individual regions of the country, including through financial support to municipalities in a manner determined by law. § 30According to this legal text, the municipalities, whose budgetary relations with the republican budget for 2001 are a contribution, are provided with additional earmarked funds, if the contribution made by the municipality to the republican budget is in the amount corresponding to the part due for the respective period. Its Constitution is in accordance with Art. 141, para 3, obliging the state to financially support the municipalities, including through funds from the state budget. Under § 35, para 2C this provision practically provides the state with financial protection of certain social groups of the population, damaged during the totalitarian state. These are obligations of municipalities in relation to the owners of expropriated real estate and young people who worked in construction under the repealed Decree № 70 of the Council of Ministers of 1980. Therefore, the provision is in accordance with the principles of the rule of law - Article 4. , para 1 of the basic law. According to § 37According to this paragraph the funds approved by law for acquisition of fixed tangible assets and overhaul of the local municipal roads shall be distributed by municipalities by 30.03.2001 by an order determined by the Council of Ministers. The Constitutional Court in Decision № 2/2001 under c.d. № 10/2000 has explicitly stated that the independence of the municipal budget does not exclude the possibility of appropriate participation of the competent executive bodies in the process of drawing up and implementing municipal budgets. This is even more true for a government which, according to Art. para 1 of the basic law implements the domestic policy of the country. That is why the challenged provision does not contradict the Constitution.III. Regarding the compliance of the provisions of the Law on Local Self-Government for 2001 with the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECMS) According to ECMS, local self-government bodies have the right to sufficient own funds to dispose of freely, but within the national economic policy - Art. 9, item 1. The national economic policy of the Republic of Bulgaria is determined by the National Assembly and the government - art. 1, para 1 and art. 105, para 1 of the Constitution. Within its framework with the State Budget Law for 2001, the municipalities have been provided with sufficient free funds for their normal activity. On the other hand, with Article 9, item 5 of the ECMS it is insisted on protection of financially weaker local communities through appropriate financial procedures and measures. This requirement was also achieved by the Parliament when adopting the law on the state budget for 2001, as it is clear from the reasons under item II of the decision. That is why the attacked provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001 are in accordance with the EHMS. stated and on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, items 2 and 4 the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: 1. Rejects the request of 59 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly for declaring the unconstitutionality of the following provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001: 1, para 2 in the part under item 1.11.1., 5.1.1. and 5.2.1 .; Art. 2, para 1, item II, para 2, para 5 in the part regarding the word “overfulfillment” and para 8; Article 9, paragraphs 1 and 2; Article 10, paragraph 1; Article 11, paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 5; Art. 13, para 4 and 5 in the part regarding the words “the bodies of the judiciary”, “and the mayors”, “art. 2, para 2” and “art. 9, para 2”; § 9; § 20; § 22, para 2 and 3; § 26; § 30; § 35, para 2; § 37 of the transitional and final provisions and Annexes № 3 and № 4 of the same law.2. Rejects the request of the same MPs to establish the inconsistency of the provisions of the LDBDA for 2001 referred to in item 1 of the decision with the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
JUDGMENT № 17Sofia, 2 October 2001constitutional case № 13/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Georgi Markov (Promulgated, SG No. 87 of 9 October 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov - rapporteur, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomchev The case was instituted on 4 July 2001 at the request of 57 MPs from XXXIX National Assembly. The Constitutional Court is requested to rule on the dispute over the legality of the election of MP Irena Ivanova Marinova-Varadinova. She was declared an elected member of the XXXIX National Assembly by the Simeon II National Movement coalition on 18. multi-member constituency - Razgrad. The MPs in question support the request of Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov, addressed to them in accordance with the procedure and within the terms of Article 112 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP) - SG, iss. 37/2001. By a ruling of 9.07.2001 the Constitutional Court allowed the request for examination on the merits. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Administrative Court (SAC), the Central Election Commission (CEC), the Simeon II National Movement (NMSS) coalition, Irena Ivanova Marinova-Varadinova and Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov were constituted with the same definition as interested parties in the case. .On 5.07.2001 a request with the same subject was received by the General Assembly of the SAC, on which a constitutional case № 14/2001 was initiated. With a ruling of 12.07.2001 this request was also admitted for consideration on the merits. Due to the identity of the two cases and the need to issue a joint decision with the ruling c.d. № 14/2001 was joined to c.d. № 13/2001. The applicants maintain that the election of Irena Marinova - Varadinova was made in violation of Art. 48, para 5 and Art. 74, para 2 of the Law on Public Procurement, as well as of Decision /1 10/1997 of the Constitutional court under c.d. № 14/97 (promulgated, SG No. 89/97) The CEC and Ventseslav Dimitrov submitted opinions on the case. The CEC maintains that the requests are unfounded, as the parliamentary elections are held on the proportional electoral basis. system with electoral lists of parties and coalitions according to ZINP. In view of this, a participant in the election process is the relevant political force and it depends on how many and who will be the registered candidates for MPs. In view of the above, individuals are not participants in the election process on their own grounds and are not entitled to challenge the actions of the election administration. Ventseslav Dimitrov refers to a number of decisions of the SAC, which revoked and declared null and void acts of the election administration. As a result, he should have been registered as the leader of the NMSS electoral list in the 18th multi-member constituency - Razgrad, and not Irena Marinova - Varadinova. The Constitutional Court, after discussing the considerations developed in the requests, the opinions of the parties and the attached to the case evidence, accepted the following: Initially, as the leader of the pre-election list of the NMSS coalition for the elections of 17.06.2001 in the 18th multi-member constituency - Razgrad, the district election commission (REC) registered Ventseslav Dimitrov (Decision № 29 / 16.05. By Decision № 90 of 9 June 2001, the REC annulled its registration on the grounds of Article 48, paragraph 5 of the Law on Public Procurement (due to data in the file for cooperation with the former State Security) at the request of the NMSS coalition and his place was registered by the said Irena Marinova - Varadinova. At the same time, the CEC with Decision № 330 / 13.06.2001 left without consideration the appeal of Ventseslav Dimitrov against the decision of the DEC. The Supreme Administrative Court with Decision № 4421/2001 of 15.06.2001 under Adm. № 4806/2001 annulled this decision of the CEC and annulled the decision of the DEC - Razgrad to cancel the registration of Ventseslav Dimitrov in the candidate list. The SAC had already ruled with Decision № 4270 of 13.06.2001. according to adm.d. № 4623/2001, annulling Decision № 288 of 5 June 2001 of the CEC, according to which data on cooperation with the former State Security (DS) for a person may be established by a certificate from the dossier commission. of the judicial act, the DEC took Decision № 131 of 16 June 2001, according to which Ventseslav Dimitrov should be re-registered as the leader of the NMSS coalition's election list. On the same day, the CEC, by Decision № 345 of 16 June 2001, annulled the REC decision in its entirety. As a result, on the day of the elections in the 18th multi-member constituency - Razgrad, the name of Irena Marinova - Varadinova appeared in the ballot paper of the NMSS coalition. Therefore, by Decision № 348 of 20.06.2001 of the CEC (SG, issue 56/2001) it was declared elected MP by the NMSS coalition in this constituency. In the meantime, the previous day - 19.06.2001. with Decision № 4598/2001, ruled under Adm. № 4908/2001, the SAC annulled the decision of the CEC under № 345 of 16.06.2001 in the part by which Decision № 131 / 16.06.2001 of the REC was revoked. The provision of Art. .1 of the Constitution assigns the courts to control the legality of the acts and actions of the administrative bodies. The election administration is not excluded from this control. In a state governed by the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Basic Law, judicial acts are binding on the parties to the case and enjoy the force of res judicata. In view of this, the decisions of the SAC, which revoked and declared null and void acts of the DEC and CEC, are binding on these bodies and are enforceable. Failure to comply with court decisions by the election administration can only hold the state liable for damages from illegal actions of its bodies towards the affected persons - art. 7 of the Constitution. However, this non-fulfillment cannot lead to the illegality of the election of Irena Marinova-Varadinova. It should be borne in mind that on the day of the elections - June 17, 2001, she appeared both as the leader of the candidate list of the NMSS coalition and in the ballot in the 18th multi-member constituency - Razgrad. Thus, the provision of Art. 74, para 2 of the Law on Public Procurement is observed, according to which the identity of the names and the order of the persons in the candidate list and the ballot paper is required. Irena Marinova - Varadinova meets the requirements for MP under Art. of the Constitution. It is included in the pre-election list in accordance with the procedure provided for in the ZINP - at the will and by a proper request of the central leadership of the NMSS Coalition. This happened within the term under art. 48, para 5, sentence last ZINP. The ballot paper with her name has received the necessary vote of the voter in accordance with the provision of art. 87, para 2, item 1 of the Law on Public Procurement. This also applies to Bulgarian citizens who voted abroad, as can be seen from letter № 55-00-31 of 11 July 2001 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. That is why it was correctly announced by the CEC as an MP from the NMSV coalition. Such is the will of the party coalition, which nominated Irena Varadinova as a candidate for MP. According to Decision №1 / 1994 under c.d. № 22/93 of the Constitutional Court, political parties and coalitions are subject to the right to nominate candidates and make changes in the election lists. Coalition NMSS requested annulment of the leader of the list and later did not declare another will on this issue. In view of the above and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 7 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Rejects the requests of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly and the General Assembly of the Supreme Administrative Court for declaring illegal the election of Irena Ivanova Marinova - Varadinova, appointed Member of Parliament by decision of the CEC № 348 of 20.06.2001 in the XXXIX National Assembly of Coalition "National Movement Simeon II" in the 18th multi-member constituency - Razgrad.
JUDGMENT № 18Sofia, 25 October 2001constitutional case № 15/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Stefanka Stoyanova (Promulgated, SG No. 94 of 2 November 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova - rapporteur, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted on 6.VIII. 2001 at the request of 48 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly. The request is based on Article 149, paragraph 1, item 1 of the Constitution. With it the Constitutional Court was seised to give an obligatory interpretation of art. 113, para 1 in connection with art. 68, para 1 of the basic law on the issue: can the members of the Council of Ministers also hold the position of mayor, performed by them in In the request, the need for interpretation is justified by the fact that “ministers who are at the same time mayors of municipalities have been elected in the composition of the Council of Ministers” and have not resigned, but have applied for unpaid leave. ", They continue to" retain their position as mayor. " The opinion of the group of MPs on the issue is also presented. According to this opinion, there is an incompatibility between the two positions within the meaning of Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and the elected minister must terminate the occupation of one of them. By order of 11.IX.2001 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits. and the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria have been constituted as interested parties. A written statement has been submitted only by the Council of Ministers. It maintains that Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution prohibits ministers from holding the position of mayor. The considerations in view of which the conclusion was made are in two directions: a) "the mayor… performs civil service", its occupation by ministers is constitutionally inadmissible and it is not terminated, but continues with the use of leave when it is actually interrupted. the temporary performance of the functions of this service "; b) Art. 37, para 4 of the Local Elections Act explicitly excludes the possibility for the Members of Parliament to be mayors at the same time, and due to the reference with Art. 113, para 1 to Art. 68, para 1 of the Constitution the incompatibility established with This provision shall also apply to the Ministers. The Constitutional Court considered the request, considered the considerations contained therein and in the opinion submitted, and in order to rule, took into account the following: 1. Part of the legal status of ministers is the incompatibility of this capacity with other positions and activities. The incompatibility is established by Article 113 of the Constitution. It contains a ban on the holding of certain positions and the performance of certain activities by the members of the Council of Ministers. These positions and activities are not listed in the said provision. As far as their type and the features that characterize them are concerned, it (in para 1) refers to the service and activity incompatible with the position of a Member of Parliament. In this way, it places the same restrictions on reconciliation as exist for MPs. In addition, it provides for the possibility (in paragraph 2) to expand the requirements for incompatibility by appointing by the National Assembly other positions and activities that the members of the Council of Ministers may not hold or perform. In terms of the possibility provided for increasing the scope of the restrictions, the incompatibility for the ministers differs from the one that applies to the MPs.2. The referred reference under Art. 113, para 1 is to Art. 68, para 1 of the Basic Law, where the incompatibility of the position of a Member of Parliament with the performance and performance of other service and activity is settled. The latter in their determination are divided into two groups: a) civil service and b) activity, the incompatibility of which follows from a law introducing the relevant restriction on MPs. The constitutional ban on the performance of these services and activities by the Members of Parliament undoubtedly also applies to the members of the Council of Ministers. The material on the type of activities that are the subject of the second of the groups is provided for possible legislation. Therefore, the restriction on combining such activities with the capacity of a minister will be applied only when they are provided by law. However, there is no requirement for additional legislation regarding the services covered by the first group. There is no obstacle for them to be explicitly mentioned in separate laws, but it should be borne in mind that their concretization in one or in different legal acts is not a prerequisite to apply the ban on their occupation by members of the Council of Ministers. The effect of this prohibition is manifested and it is applied regardless of the presence or absence of a law determining the positions, the implementation of which is a civil service.3. The content of the notion of civil service under Article 68, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is important for determining the scope of the ban on the holding of such service by the members of the Council of Ministers. The Constitutional Court has had occasion to interpret this concept. In the interpretation with Decision № 5 of 6.IV.1993 under c.d. № 6/93 (SG, issue 31/93) has accepted that the civil service “is generally дейност an activity for the performance of the functions of the state”, as “this activity is performed on behalf of the state and for realization of the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution ”, without, however, it being“ directly related to the production of material values ​​”. In the same sense is Decision № 4 of 30.III.1993 under c.d. № 3/93 (SG, issue 30/93). According to him, civil service is "the performance of a certain state function". At the same time, it is stated that this feature does not exhaust the content of the concept, and that outlining its framework should not ignore other features that exclude it "to be reduced to any activity useful or necessary for the state and taking into account the given interpretation, from which it does not deviate and taking into account the nature and character of the mayoral institution, the Constitutional Court accepts that in view of the incompatibility under Art. 113, para. 1 of the Basic Law, the members of the Council of Ministers may not be mayors of municipalities.4. The mayor is a body of the executive power in the municipality, which is the main administrative-territorial unit and in which the local self-government is carried out (art. 136, para 1 and art. 139 of the Constitution). As such, he manages all the activities of the municipality to implement the decisions of the municipal council and the population. In addition to the municipal mayor is an administrative body, which in this capacity performs state functions and is subject to direct control by state administration bodies. The conclusion is confirmed by Art. 139, para 2 and Art. 144 of the Constitution. The first of the provisions of the mayor assigns the implementation of all decisions of the municipal council, without excluding such decisions as the council has taken by delegation from central state bodies. In addition, it is assigned to organize the implementation of the tasks arising from the laws, without excluding such tasks as may be assigned to it by central state bodies in cases specified by law. The second of the mentioned provisions allows the provision in the law of control for legality by the central administration over the acts of the mayor of the municipality. Namely the constitutionally admissible form of control by an administrative body over acts of the mayors of municipalities and the nature of their indicated powers are grounds to assume that they also act as administrative bodies. From the above regarding the constitutional regulation of the legal status and powers of mayors that their functions are related to the exercise of state power on the territory of the respective municipality. In this sense, their implementation is an activity for the performance of the functions of the state, which activity, as not directly related to the production of material values, constitutes a civil service. Therefore, it is included in the scope of the prohibition under Art. 113, para 1 of the Basic Law and in view of this prohibition it is constitutionally inadmissible to occupy the position and combine it by members of the Council of Ministers.5. As already noted, the effect of the ban on holding a position, the performance of which is a civil service, does not require, but at the same time does not exclude additional legislation. For reasons of avoiding a possible dispute, ambiguity or for other reasons, the law may explicitly specify positions that members of the Council of Ministers may not hold. The Constitutional Court notes that the subject of such legislation is the incompatibility of the question. Article 37, paragraph 4 of the Local Elections Act (SG, issue 66/95) allows a Member of Parliament to be a candidate for mayor. However, the same provision also states that if elected, he shall cease to be a Member of Parliament. Therefore, the performance of the functions of mayor is incompatible with the position of a Member of Parliament. In view of the reference under Art. 113, para 1 to Art. 68, para 1 of the Constitution, it must be assumed that the incompatibility also refers to the holding of the position of mayor by members of the Council of Ministers. Thus, although this incompatibility derives from the Constitution and although the constitutional norm establishing it is directly applicable, the restriction on reconciliation is also contained in law.6. The prohibition, which is introduced by art. 113, para 1 of the Constitution in relation to the members of the Council of Ministers, is for the holding by them of a certain position and the performance of a certain activity. The holding of a position continues from the emergence of the powers to perform the functions of its implementation until the termination of these powers. The necessary conditions and preconditions for their occurrence, as well as for their termination are not contained in the Constitution. They are subject to legislation, which may be and is different for different activities. Regardless of the difference in the regulation, it should be noted that the use of leave (paid, unpaid, official) under conditions and in accordance with the law is constitutional. right of the workers and employees - art. 48, para 5 of the Constitution. His exercise may not be grounds for termination of office. As a legal position with a longer or shorter duration, the position continues during the duration of the duly authorized and used leave. Therefore, if there is a restriction for its combination by those performing certain functions - for example by MPs under Article 68, paragraph 1 of the Constitution or by members of the Council of Ministers under Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, this restriction does not fall away. For these reasons and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 1 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court DECIDES: The incompatibility under Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution excludes the holding of the position of mayor of a municipality by members of The Council of Ministers and this restriction on reconciliation shall not be waived in the use of leave by those holding this position.
JUDGMENT № 7Sofia, 10 April 2001.constitutional case № 1/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Vasil Gotsev (Promulgated, SG No. 38 of 17 April 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev - rapporteur, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva. of the SAC by the order of art. 150, para 2 of the Constitution. When considering the adm. d. № 4918/2000 the applicant “International Center for Corporate Governance” AD developed considerations for contradiction of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act (TFL) with the Constitution, which the court accepted as justified. He suspended the proceedings in the case and made a request to the Constitutional Court to establish the unconstitutionality of the provision of § 6 of the TFP ZDS (SG, issue 44 of 21 May 1996, amended, issue 104 of 1996, issue 55, 61 and 117 of 1997, issues 93 and 124 of 1988, issues 67 of 1999 and issues 9, 12, 26 and 57 of 2000) due to contradiction with art. 17, para . 3 and 5, Art. 19 and Art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution and for inconsistency with Art. 1 of the First Additional Protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (SG, issue 66 of 1992). , amended, SG No. 137/1998). The request also states Art. 149, para 1, item 4 as a legal basis, but the statement does not contain a request for interpretation of a text of the Constitution. According to Art. 56, para 1 of the LDA, the right of ownership over real estate - private state property, shall be established for a term not longer than 10 years. According to the contested before the Constitutional Court § 6 of the TFP LPA for the right of use established until the entry into force of the law indefinitely or for more than 10 years . When it has expired on the date of entry into force of the law, the right of use is terminated and the property is transferred to the state within six months from the same date. According to the composition of the Third Department of the SAC: 1. The reduction of the term from § 6 of the TFR to 10 years restricts the right to property, protected by Art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution. In essence, this means forced expropriation of property and all requirements of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution: - specifically proven state or municipal need that cannot be met in another way and prior fair compensation.2. There was also a contradiction with Article 19 of the Constitution. According to the request, the principle of free initiative was violated (Article 19, paragraph 1 of the Constitution), guaranteeing all citizens and legal entities equal conditions for economic activity (Article 19, paragraph 1). .2 of the Constitution) and the protection of investments and economic activity (Art. 19, para 3 of the Constitution). It is pointed out that when the state carries out economic activity and participates in the civil turnover by concluding contracts, it acts under equal legal conditions with all citizens and legal entities. Article 19, paragraphs 2 and 4 of the Constitution applied not only to citizens and legal entities, but also to the state and municipalities.3. Reducing the term of use was also inconsistent with the principle of the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The rearrangement of relations to which the state is a party, by law violates the constitutionally guaranteed rights of economic entities. This is contrary to the requirement of legal certainty, which is an element of the content of the rule of law.4. In addition to all the above, § 6 of the TFP was in conflict with Article 1 of the First Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The request of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court to establish the unconstitutionality of § 6 of the TFR was allowed for examination of the merits by order of the Constitutional Court of 13 February 2001. The request for recognition of incompatibility with the First Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was not admitted for consideration by the order of the Court of 5 April 2001 and in This part of the proceedings has been terminated. In pursuance of the opportunity provided to them by the Constitutional Court, opinions on the merits of the request were expressed by the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works, the Minister of Finance, the Sofia District Governor, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Chamber, the Union of Employers in Bulgaria, “Me International Center for Corporate Governance AD ​​Sofia, the Supreme Bar Council, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation. A request has also been received from Shell Bulgaria AD stating that it has an interest in the issue raised. and asks to be constituted as an interested party in the case, having also presented his opinion. The Speaker of the National Assembly has sent an opinion to the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs and Anti-Corruption Legislation, which provides the decision to the Constitutional Court without expressing an opinion. The Supreme Court of Cassation and the Bulgarian International Business Association have expressed opinions. The Supreme Administrative Court has not submitted additional considerations in support of the request of the Third Division of the court, as given the opportunity. and the district governor of the district of Sof They state that § 6 of the TFR does not contradict the Constitution, as in this case it is not a question of expropriation of property rights, but of reorganization of the state property regime in view of the Constitution of 1991, whereby the subjects who received right of use on state property under the old law on state property and that of the current law on state property. According to them, there is no prohibition in the Constitution to introduce retroactive effect of civil substantive laws. In their opinions, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Union of Employers in Bulgaria, International Center for Corporate Governance AD ​​Sofia, the Supreme Bar Council, The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Bulgarian Human Rights Advocates Foundation and Shell Bulgaria AD fully support the applicant's considerations - Division III of the Supreme Administrative Court. In order to rule on the merits of the request, the Constitutional Court took into account the following: is a limited real right, which is regulated by Article 59 of the Insurance Act. It can be established by the owner for a certain period or indefinitely. By its nature, it is an absolute right. This determines its closest connection with the right of ownership.1. Regarding the contradiction with Article 17 of the Constitution, the use of a thing may be granted to a person other than the owner of the thing. From the point of view of its content in the specific case it is irrelevant whether the right of use has the character of a real right or a claim. There is no doubt that in all cases the right of use is monetary. It is a property for its owner, a property right. In this broad sense, understood as property, it is part of the patrimony of its holder, his property. Therefore, once established, the right of use is considered and protected by law separately from the right of ownership over the thing (property) itself. The Constitution protects property in the broadest sense of the word. It provides such protection to receivables and, with even greater justification, to property rights. The Constitutional Court has explicitly extended the protection of the ownership of the receivables - "… a private receivable… may be forcibly expropriated, but only under the conditions of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution…" - Decision № 22 of 10 December 1996 on k.d. № 24/96 (SG, issue 1 of 1997). In Decision № 17 of 16 December 1999 under c.d. № 14/99 the court explicitly noted that the receivables "… are unconditionally covered by the constitutional protection of property contained in Article 17, paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Constitution" (SG, issue 113 of 1999). The Constitution provides for the possibility of compulsory expropriation of property (including the right of use) in Article 17, paragraph 5. However, in order to realize this possibility, it is absolutely necessary to comply with several (cumulatively given) additional requirements. The requirements will only be listed here, without being considered in detail: the act of expropriation (individual) to be "based on law"; the expropriation should be for state and municipal needs, which "cannot be satisfied in any other way"; providing prior and equivalent compensation to the persons concerned. There is no doubt that the impugned norm has an expropriating effect. It revokes a legally established right of use for a period of more than 10 years. The fact that this right is established on state property is irrelevant to the Constitution. The right of use belongs to another person, different from the state and its revocation is admissible only in compliance with the conditions provided in Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. The statement that the norm does not take away the right to property, but only rearranges the legal relations that have arisen retroactively, is untrue and meaningless. Reorganization is only a legislative approach. The legal effect (and purpose) of this reorganization is precisely the revocation of the right of use for a period of more than ten years; a right which the user has acquired in good faith and lawfully. In the specific case it cannot be maintained that the disputed norm meets the constitutional standards. Even if it is assumed that there are separate contracts concluded under unfavorable conditions for the state, which justifies the state's need to terminate them, there is no legal formula to ensure that the norm will apply only to unfavorable contracts. The regulation leads to the termination of any right of use upon expiration of the 10-year term, regardless of the manner of its establishment and the benefit for the state. The termination opens an opportunity to negotiate with new, nicer users. Separately, the guarantee of the other constitutional conditions - the payment of preliminary and equivalent (market) compensation - remains in question. The compensation is preliminary when it is paid before the revocation of the right of ownership. The norm does not provide for such compensation. The abstract in this case possibility for compensation of the occurred damages, after conducting long cases with unclear end, in no way can replace the constitutional requirement for preliminary and equivalent compensation. use before the expiration of the agreed term, exceeding 10 years, violates art. 17, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution.2. Regarding the contradiction with art. 19, para 1, 2 and 3 of the ConstitutionAccording to art. 19, para 1 of the Constitution the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria is based on the free economic initiative. Free business initiative can be developed only with legal certainty for legal entities in carrying out their business activities. According to Article 20a of the Law on Obligations and Contracts, the contract concluded between the parties is a law for them. The changes in the terms of a contract concluded with one law undoubtedly create uncertainty in the implementation of the business initiative and hinder its free development. According to Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the law creates and guarantees to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity. With regard to state-owned property, the state acts as an equal and equal partner in legal relations to which it is a party. This means that it cannot by law unilaterally change the terms of a contract it has concluded. Hence, the term of a contract to which it is a party cannot be reduced by law. In its Decision № 19/93 under c.d. № 11/93 (SG, issue 4/94), the Constitutional Court explicitly confirmed this understanding, saying that in the exercise of private property all legal entities are equal. Art. 19, para 2 and 4 refer not only to the citizens and the legal entities, but also to the state and the municipalities ”. In its private relations with third parties, the state is an equal subject with them. It is inadmissible by law to create for itself more favorable rules under already concluded contracts. Subsequent legislative change under a contract between the state and third parties violates the principle of equality. Such a change is unconstitutional and invalidates the rule of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. Along with all that has been said, § 6 of the TFR also contradicts Article 19, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. The ceded right of use over state property is always related to investments and economic activity of Bulgarian and foreign citizens, which are protected by the constitutional provision. It is normal for the investments to be complied with and for the economic activity to develop in view of the duration of the contract, for the ceded right of use. The shortening of its term by a law that has retroactive effect is more than obviously contrary to the constitutional principle of protecting investments and economic activity by law. This shortening of the term can be an unbearable burden, both for the investor and for the state itself, if it has to pay for the investments made. It should be borne in mind that many foreign investments have been made by establishing the right of use due to the explicit prohibition of Article 22, paragraph 1 of the Constitution for foreigners and foreign legal entities to acquire the right of ownership over land. Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the VAT Act encroaches on investments made and creates uncertainty for future investments.3. Regarding the contradiction with the principle of the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, the challenged provision has a retroactive effect. It concerns contracts concluded before it. It is true that the Constitution does not prohibit the substantive civil law from retrospectively (Decision № 9/92 under Code of Civil Procedure № 4/92, SG No. 64/92). In the case of § 6 of the TFR, however, legal relations are rearranged, which encroach on acquired rights, which creates a danger for the confidence in the Bulgarian law and in the stability of the legal framework in our country. It cannot be assumed that the challenged provision reorganizes the state property regime in accordance with the new Constitution. It is the new Constitution that contains conditions that prohibit rearrangement in the manner provided for in § 6 of the TFR. The termination by law of a legal position in favor of the state and to the detriment of those with whom it has negotiated, contradicts the principle of the rule of law, raised by Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and is an infringement on the foundations of ed. "The rule of law… means, inter alia, that the foundations of the rule of law enshrined in the Constitution apply equally to the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, as well as to all other legal entities" (Decision № 17 / 99 under cd № 14/99, SG, issue 113/99). When the reverse effect of a law that infringes acquired rights is not motivated in favor of the highest public interest, without a clear will to settle the consequences, it cannot be defined otherwise than as expropriation. And this, in turn, violates not only Article 17 of the Constitution, but also contradicts the principle of the rule of law, enshrined in Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. For the stated reasons and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph .1, item 2 of the Constitution The Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Declares unconstitutional the provision of § 6 TFP of the LDA (SG, issue 44 of 21 May 1996, amended, issue 104/96, issue 55, 61, 117/1997, nos. 93 and 124/98, nos. 67/99 and nos. 9, 12, 26 and 57/2000).
DECISION № 8Sofia, 3 May 2001constitutional case № 10/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Rumen Yankov (Promulgated, SG No. 44 of 8 May 2001) Member State: Hristo Danov - President, Members: Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov - Rapporteur, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva By order of 19 April 2001 the Constitutional Court essentially the request of 61 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 7, para 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP); The request maintains that the mentioned texts introduced a barrier for both the active and the passive suffrage, depending on the property status of the citizens. These texts violated Art. 42 and Art. 11 in connection with Art. 6, para 2 and Art. 4, para. 2 and the preamble of the Constitution, taken in their interrelation. The interested parties Council of Ministers and the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee consider that the request is unfounded. Both opinions are based on the assertion that the obligation to pay the costs of printing the ballots is a guarantee that parties, coalitions and independent candidates have a responsible role in the conduct of the elections and their future possible participation in the government. The disputed norms applied equally to all participants in the elections and did not create unequal conditions and privileges for any of them. The opinion of the Civil Initiative for Free and Democratic Elections and the Bulgarian Association for Fair Elections and Civil Rights is contrary. According to them, the exercise of active and passive suffrage is regulated at the constitutional level and it must be guaranteed by the state. The opinions claim that in this case a kind of property qualification has been introduced in the exercise of the passive suffrage. In order to rule, the Constitutional Court took into account the following: According to Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Law on Elections, the expenses for election preparation to be at the expense of the state budget, with the exception of the costs for printing the ballot papers. The idea is further developed in Article 76 of the law. It shows that these costs are at the expense of parties, coalitions and independent candidates. There is an obligation within thirty-one days before the elections to pay to the account of the Council of Ministers the necessary amounts for printing the ballots. Insofar as no bank document for payment has been submitted, the registration of the party, the coalition and the independent candidate shall be annulled by the district election commission. which determined that the costs of organizational and technical preparation for the elections are borne by the state. The current law also abandons the system for subsidizing the election campaign of parties and coalitions. The provision of Article 10 of the Constitution states that elections are held on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The wording shows that there is an explicit obligation for the state, not the right to hold or not to hold elections in this way. In itself, the meaning of the word elections contains a requirement for pluralism - a plurality of participation of passive subjects of suffrage. From the analysis of the text further it follows that elections must be general. Indeed, the Constitution does not mention that elections should be free and fair. But there is little doubt that the last two requirements are intrinsic qualities of general elections. Fair representation is what most adequately represents public attitudes and political opinions in parliament. And this basic requirement could not be fulfilled if in one way or another passive or active suffrage is limited above the established norms. According to Article 11, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, political life in the Republic of Bulgaria is based on the principle of political pluralism. . Without going into this complex area, it should be noted that the main representatives of political pluralism are the parties and to a lesser extent the citizens and associations of a political nature. On the other hand, according to Article 11, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, the parties assist in forming and expressing the political will of the citizens. The forum for their realization is the current political life and mainly the parliamentary elections. From this point of view, the property status of the parties cannot be an obstacle to expressing the will of the citizens. We cannot talk about legal equality of party participation in the elections through the introduction of a common economic burden, which would hardly hinder some of them and would deprive others of participation in the election process. Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution has also been violated. For example, if there are no funds, the independent candidate will be deprived of the opportunity to participate in the elections. In this sense, there is essentially a restriction of equality before the law based on his property status. Indeed, there are "hopeless" political candidates. It is understandable that they will be hindered by the introduction of certain contributions, which in case of electoral failure will not be refunded. This is the practice mainly in the majority type of elections. However, this practice cannot have anything to do with the constitutional obligation of the state to hold general elections. Due to the above, the court held that the norms challenged by the MPs were unconstitutional - Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Law on Elections. of the ballots ”and art. 76, para 1 in the part“ and the party or the coalition pays the expenses for the production of the ballots with which it participates in the elections ”, art. 76, para 2 on the production of the ballots with which the candidates participate in the elections ”. It is necessary to establish the unconstitutionality in full of the other paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, which are in close connection and function of the first two. We are guided by the above and on the grounds of Art. , THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT DECIDES: Declares unconstitutional the following provisions of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (SG, issue 37 of 13 April 2001): Article 7, paragraph 2 regarding the words the ballot papers ”, as well as art. 76, para 1, sentence 1, para 2, sentence 1 and para 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
