Special opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov

I signed the decision of March 26, 2002 under c.d. № 17/2001 with a special opinion on some of the disputed provisions of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for the radio and television (ZIDZRT). My considerations are the following:

1. The radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit are specific objects, common to the public and their use by individual states is carried out through international agreements (Decision № 18 of 30 June 1998 under Code of Civil Procedure № 17/98, SG, No. 77 of 1998). They are a limited resource and the state exercises sovereign rights over them, determining by law the terms and conditions under which it grants permits (licenses) for their use - Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution.

The state cannot renounce the constitutionally granted rights only to it and cede them to a non-state body, because this would be a violation of the Constitution (Decision № 33 of 8.12.1998 under Code of Civil Procedure № 30/98, SG, issue 147 of 1998).

Both the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for the Republic of Bulgaria by international agreements, are treated equally in Article 18 of the Constitution, which requires the same legal framework at the legal level. This is not complied with by the LPISD. Its provisions provide for the participation of the state - in the person of the Communications Regulation Commission (CRC) - only when the radio or television programs are broadcast by terrestrial broadcasting, ie. by broadcasting from terrestrial radio transmitters. When the distribution of programs takes place via satellite, ie. by using the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country by international agreements, ZIDZRT does not provide for any participation of the state, although it still has sovereign rights in these cases. The same law completely eliminates the state in the distribution of programs through positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country, and with § 46 creates Article 125a, according to which “Persons wishing to create radio or television programs for distribution by means other than terrestrial broadcasting, are subject to registration ”, and it is carried out by the non-governmental body Council for Electronic Media (CEM). The opinion of the legislator, who adopted the Law on Public Procurement, that the state should not participate when radio or television programs are broadcast through geostationary orbit positions, determined for our country, is clearly expressed in § 53 (1), according to which carrying out radio or television activity via satellite, go through a registration mode.

The mentioned § 46 and § 53 (1), as well as § 13 - art. 32, para 1, item 13 and § 14; § 26 - Article 106, paragraph 3; § 34 - Article 116; §37 - art. 116c, para 1, 2 and 4, envisage state participation only in case of distribution of programs by terrestrial radio broadcasting, but not by satellite, ie. through positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country by international agreements. Therefore, these provisions of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights contradict Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution.

The Law on Radio and Television must contain provisions in accordance with Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution, regardless of whether at the time of its adoption the technical means for telecommunications specified in the same constitutional provision are applied or this will happen in the future. , during the operation of the law. The same legislator in a relatively short time after the adoption of the disputed LULUCF acted exactly like this, making changes in the Telecommunications Act (TA), SG, issue 112 of 2001 and fully harmonizes Article 27, paragraph 4 of the TA with Article 18. , para 3 and 5 of the Constitution.

2. The sovereign rights of the state on the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country, are reduced only to giving information by the state body CRC to the non-state CEM, whether there are free radio frequencies and what are their parameters (§ 13 - art. 32, para 9, item 13). The state body is deprived of the right to discretion. He is engaged by the decision of the CEM both in the issuance of a telecommunications license and in its transfer (§ 26 - art. 106, para. 3), termination (§ 42 - art. 121, para. 2), revocation (§ 44 - art. 123a), continuation (§ 45 - art. 125, para 3). The Article 116c, para 2, created by § 37, even stipulates that the CEM, after holding a competition, decides to issue not only a license for radio or television activity, but also an individual license for telecommunications activity. Thus, the sovereign rights of the state under Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Constitution are granted to a non-state body. In the mentioned provisions of the Act, the participation of the state is limited to informing whether or not there are free radio frequencies. This contradicts the nature of the rights of the state under Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. They are sovereign, ie. with the widest possible range, include an assessment not only whether but also to whom to provide the radio frequency spectrum and the positions of the geostationary orbit, determined for our country by international agreements.

Due to the above, the above provisions of the Act are unconstitutional.

3. Paragraph 25 creates para 6 to art. 105, according to which the applicants for a license for radio or television activity must submit to the CEM documents for the origin of the capital for the last 3 years, including a certified accounting report.

The one created by § 46 para 2 of art. 125a stipulates that those wishing to register must submit to the CEM the documents under art. 111, which text has also been amended (with § 29), but only for which body it is submitted to. the application - instead of before the state CRC before the non-state CEM. In the rest of it, containing an exhaustive list of the documents attached to the application, there is no change . Between these documents in item 6 is indicated a declaration that the circumstances under art. 105, para 4 are not present, but not under the newly created para 6, referring to the origin of the capital. Article 105 now has a new paragraph 6, but Article 111 does not refer to it with the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights and this is the difference between applicants for licensing and those for registration - only the former provide data on the origin of their capital in the last 3 years will perform radio or television activities. Data on the origin of the capital are necessary for the same reasons, because the activity is the same, regardless of the technical way of its implementation. Unjustifiably created different legal conditions for the same economic activity, which violates Article 19, para. .2 of the Constitution. Therefore, § 46 - art. 125a, para 2, is an unconstitutional provision.

 