JUDGMENT № 10
Sofia, 29 October 2002
constitutional case № 12/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Margarita Zlatareva
(Promulgated, SG No. 103 of 5 November 2002)

Composition: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva - Rapporteur, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

I

The Constitutional Court was seised with a request by a panel of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fifth Civil Division to rule on the constitutionality of the provision of § 5, para 1 of the transitional and final provisions of the Cooperatives Act (TFP), promulgated, SG, no. .113 of 28.12.1999

The submitters of the request limit their complaints only to the case in which cooperatives and cooperative unions are terminated by right and when they have changed their statutes in accordance with the requirements of the new LC, but after the deadlines under § 2 and § 3 TF of the LC. For these cases in the reasonable part of the request it is maintained that the said provision contradicts the constitutionally guaranteed right of association, enshrined in Article 44, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. It is also alleged that there is an internal contradiction between the disputed legal provision and the consistent principle in the Cooperatives Act - only the general meeting of the cooperative to decide to terminate the cooperative, which contradiction also leads to unconstitutionality. It is concluded that the Constitution declares the obligation of the law to create a condition for cooperation and not to interfere with this activity, so the provision of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA does not comply with Article 19, paragraph 4 of the Constitution.

With a ruling of 25.06.2002, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration on the merits regarding the constitutionality of the provision of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA, regardless of the cases that may arise in practice during its application. The Supreme Court of Cassation, the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice, the Prosecutor General, the Supreme Bar Council, and the Central Cooperative Union have been constituted as interested parties in the case.

ІІ

Pursuant to the opportunity provided to them by the Constitutional Court, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice and the Supreme Bar Council submitted opinions on the case.

The opinions of all interested parties who expressed their opinion maintain that the challenged provision of the Cooperatives Act does not contradict the Constitution.

The opinion of the Council of Ministers states that, on the contrary, § 5, para 1 of the TFP of the Insurance Code ensures compliance with the principle of the rule of law by sanctioning behavior inconsistent with the law. The same is maintained by the Minister of Justice, who states that the purpose of the disputed provision is to stimulate the lawful conduct of cooperatives. According to the Supreme Bar Council, the provision of § 5 TFR of the Insurance Act implements the principle of equality of legal entities before the law - of newly established cooperatives in accordance with the requirements of the new legal regime and existing cooperatives obliged to bring their statutes in line with this regime.

The other constituted parties do not comment.

III

The Constitutional Court, discussing the considerations set out in the request, as well as the written opinions of the interested parties, adopted the following:

1. According to the disputed provision of § 5, para 1 TFP of the LC, the cooperatives and cooperative unions are terminated by right if within 9 months from the entry into force of the law they do not change their statutes in accordance with the requirements of the new Law on Cooperatives. 14 days from the adoption of the changes do not request entry in the register at the district court the circumstances subject to entry.

The purpose of § 5, para 1 TFP of the Insurance Code, evident from the motives of the legislator in the adoption of the first reading of the law (stenographic diaries of the XXXVIII National Assembly, 7th session, 254 sitting of 29.04.1999), is to equalize the status of the existing cooperatives with those that will be established under the new law, due to the significant difference in the regulation of their legal regime.

2. The termination of the cooperatives and the cooperative unions by law is related to the constitutional principles of art. 12, para 1 and art. 19, para 4 of the basic law - the cooperative is a voluntary association of natural persons, which through mutual assistance and cooperation carry out commercial activity, and the cooperative unions are legal associations of cooperatives.

The constitutional bases of the associations of the citizens in all forms of their manifestation are outlined in art. 12, para 1 of the Constitution. The general criterion of the purpose of the association is the interest of the members - the associations must serve to satisfy and protect their interests, which can be both economic and non-profit.

However, the Constitution does not determine the rules for the formation of various associations of citizens, including cooperatives. The law is the one that creates the conditions for cooperation and other forms of association of citizens to achieve economic and social progress - Article 19, paragraph 4 of the Constitution. The term “creates conditions” used by the Constitution should be understood not only as an obligation of the legislator to provide good conditions for economic activity, but also as a right of the legislator to determine the rules of this activity. It follows that the change of the conditions for cooperation is also determined by law.

The constitutional principle of art. 19, para 4 extends also to the cooperative unions, because it assigns to the law to create conditions for association of legal entities as well.

These are the constitutional principles on which the legal regime of cooperatives and cooperative unions should be based, and within which any legal amendment must fit.

3. With the Cooperatives Act of 1999. changes the legal regime of cooperatives and cooperative unions, established by the law of the same name from 1991, and in its transitional and final provisions it is imposed on the obligation of the existing cooperatives and cooperative unions to bring their statutes in line with the new legal permits. Failure to comply with this obligation is subject to the sanction of termination of the defective cooperative or cooperative union, respectively a fine for their governing bodies.

Whether the obligation to comply with the new requirements of the law will be strengthened by the sanction of termination of existing legal entities, a fine or replacement of the rules of the statute with mandatory legal norms while maintaining the legal capacity of legal entities (eg § 1, para 1 TFP of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities, § 10, para 1 TFR of the Commercial Law), this is decided by the legislator.

In this case, the termination by law was chosen as a sanction for non-compliance with the new legal regime and this legislative decision does not affect the right of association of the cooperators, in what direction are the complaints in the request. The members of the cooperative can remain united as one civil society under the CPA. The provision of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA takes away only the legal capacity of the organization, which legal capacity is initially obtained through actions of public order prescribed by law.

Providing for the termination by right of the cooperatives after the occurrence of the conditions specified in § 5, para 1 TFR of the Insurance Act, the disputed provision does not harm the constitutionally guaranteed interests of the cooperatives. It provides for reasonably long deadlines for bringing the statutes in line with the new legal regime, which protects the interests of its members and the provision remains in accordance with the constitutional requirement of Article 12, paragraph 1.

The opinion cannot be accepted that the termination by right, chosen by § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA, hinders the cooperation, raised as a constitutional order by art. 19, para 4 of the Basic Law. As already mentioned, the law determines the conditions for cooperation, the conditions for merging of cooperatives and precisely for the commercial entities that have complied with the law is the constitutional guarantee of art. 19, para 4. In addition, the principle of the rule of law - Article 4 of the Constitution, requires the stimulation of conduct in accordance with the law.

The compliance of the statutes of the existing cooperatives with the requirements of the new regime is also imposed by the constitutional principle for providing all legal entities with equal legal conditions for economic activity - Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The created new legal regime of the cooperatives differs in separate parts significantly from the previous one, which in view of the unification could not be applied without amending the statute of the cooperative and the subsequent actions.

Unification of the rules under which the existing and newly established cooperatives operate ensures the same legal conditions for economic activity, both for the cooperatives themselves and for their counterparties. As already mentioned, on the one hand, citizens' associations must serve to satisfy and protect the interests of the members themselves. On the other hand, the security of other legal entities in the general economic and public life must be protected, so the state makes sure that the rules for the establishment of the cooperative are clearly defined. The framework set by law for the conditions for cooperation creates a balance between the interests of the citizens who formed the cooperative and the interests of the state and the rest of the citizens who do not participate in the cooperative. The maintenance of conduct in accordance with the law is required of all participants in legal life in view of the existence of a certain, created by the state security and definability of legal relations.

4. The Constitutional Court does not find any internal contradiction between the power of the general assembly of the cooperative to decide its termination and the termination of the cooperative by right through the disputed provision, which would lead to unconstitutionality of § 5, para 1 TFR of the CA, as claims in the request.

The Law on Cooperatives provides different grounds for termination of the cooperative: voluntary termination - by decision of the General Meeting; termination upon occurrence of objective conditions - expiration of term, stay with members less than 7 people, non-commencement of activity within 1 year; termination due to culpable conduct - by decision of a district court in violation of the law. The termination of the cooperative by right provided for in § 5, para 1 TFP of the Insurance Code is a ground beyond the above, approaching the subjective grounds rather than the objective facts, but it is not the only one that is based on inconsistent with the law of conduct.

It is possible that the application of § 5, para 1 of the TFP of the Insurance Code may give rise to unfair resolution of some cases. The Supreme Court of Cassation is the one that has the right to interpret the norm in favor of the law in combination with the justice of life.

The Constitutional Court in this case cannot discuss the fair application of the provision. It is necessary and sufficient to state that the provision of § 5, para 1 TFP of the Insurance Code does not conflict with the other grounds for termination of the cooperation, does not lead to internal contradiction of the law, and hence to unconstitutionality, therefore this argument for incompatibility of the provision with the Constitution is unfounded.

Based on the stated considerations and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of a panel of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fifth Civil Division for establishing the unconstitutionality of the provision of § 5, para 1 of the transitional and final provisions of the Cooperatives Act (promulgated, SG No. 113 of 28.12.1999) .

 

 