Special opinion of Judge Rumen Yankov

Undoubtedly, the essence of the interpretive question is regards to the status of state property , invoked by judicial authorities for implementation of the functions it.

So far, no is no dispute , that Ministers Council determines by whom and in what order will be managed this property , except if a law not been provided otherwise . A particular case of 1995 has imposed unchallenged by anyone clarify , that in cases , in which at government buildings - public property , are housed judicial institutions , unacceptable is without express their consent to be issued unilateral acts of administration by appropriate . In this sense, it is the decision by k.d . № 23 of 1995

In this decision is made retreat from principled position , that " organized management " in the final bill is uniform power . Only practical impossibility Ministers Council unilaterally to carry out intricate work in management is imposed , it can be provided in separate bodies and organizations .

Destructive interpretation in case there is a consequence decomposition of uniform power , without to be made argument in this direction . And it lacks not due to any flaw , but because the very constitutional provision of Article 106 in that its part does not give grounds for another conclusion . The term " organized " is ambiguous and difficult it could not be incorporated in it definitely content without clarification of the doctrine and constitutional practice term " stewardship ", which for brevity not need to be repetition . And not in last place in grammatical plan addendum " stewardship " explains predicate " organized ", which means someone or something in the range of verb action .

Moreover the results of such an interpretation already are there . Witnesses are on trial for assault in the framework of herself judicial system on the occasion of the management of the Judicial Office in Sofia . And this is so , because the organization of management not been committed by constitutionally the empowered body - Ministers Council , which as mentioned already interpretation of 1995 did not have able to do anything without the consent of the bodies of judicial power . Obviously it is , however , that in the framework of the third power such consent not be required .

 