Special opinion of Judge Rumen Yankov

The Constitutional Court was seised to interpret :

a) what is the legal nature of the provisions of Article 98, paragraph 6 and Article 100, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution in part to their more ' proposal of Ministers Council "and the provision of Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution in the part her " proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council " and

b) subject Do these proposals on judicial control of part of the SAC and in cases , in which the president already has issued a decree on the basis of them .

The appointment of those listed in the above texts officials person becomes a decision of the Council of Ministers or SCM, followed by presidential decree . On a common language both act , set in a specific sequence of time , the lawyers called complex factual composition , caused by joint competence .

In Article 98, pt. 6, Article 100, paragraph 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution is mentioned , that the president issued decrees on the appointment of a particular category of public entities on a proposal of the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Judicial Council. On the other hand , for the powers of the Council of Ministers have to be assumed by the content of article 114 of the Constitution : in execution of laws to adopt decrees , orders and decisions , and for the Supreme Judicial Council by Article 131 of the Constitution - solutions and proposals .

Human activity in this number and legal , is rational . The mind off to be accepted , that the personnel decisions of the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Judicial Council, which has to be followed by presidential decree , was taken by collective bodies themselves for him to , of aimlessly meeting for discussion of personnel matters . On the contrary , decisions are made in order to make a proposal to the president . The proposals are intrinsically inherent in the decisions , they are incorporated in them . The decision not can not be understood without motion and vice versa .

In the final account interpretation , which would have to be done in the first place is that the word " decision " and " offer " used in constitutional texts , no self- importance . They need to be seen in the linguistic sense ( grammatical and semantic ) generally , as an act of administrative authority , which is one component of the complex factual composition for appointment of officials persons of the President . This conclusion absolutely can not be done directly for the acts of the Supreme Judicial Council in Article 131 of the Constitution , which will be discussed below .

The decision on k.d . № 2/2002, in my opinion , was built on the wrong basis . Need is a short commentary on the wrong plays .

For the first prerequisite of the decision , the court is drawing the by definition of the doctrine of administrative act " as the supreme statement of administrative or other authorized body , made on the basis and in execution of the law , giving rise to immediate legal consequences , whose performance is affixed with legal coercion ."

The provision of Article 120, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution specifies , that the courts carry out control of legality of acts and actions of administrative authorities . Sees is , that she handled with the term " acts of the administration " in a broad sense . From this view point the working definition of the court " generation of immediate legal consequences , whose performance not is affixed with coercion " not able to be an attribute of all administrative acts . According to the hypothesis of Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, it is sufficient for them to be issued by authorized bodies in fulfillment of their constitutional obligations , which would cause changes in a foreign legal sphere . You need to be there in mind , that concept does not have to be interpreted restrictively , if it is hard , that Bulgaria is a constitutional state - Article 4, Paragraph 1.

Further , for to justify the conclusion you , that the proposals do not have administrative acts , the court began to seek arguments there , where not need . Thus, the decisions of the Council of Ministers or the SJC are defined as a non-independent act , different from the proposal, and the unified concept ( decision and proposal ) is broken down . From now on there is no something easier on the noun " proposal " to him be denied legal qualifications " administrative act ". It is defined only as a " preparatory action ".

In fact for the preparatory nature of the decision of the SJC can not be spoken in the presence of the provision of Article 131 of the Constitution , according to which decisions ( for appointment of ordinary magistrates ) and the proposals in Article 129, paragraph 2 is taken by secret ballot . Which preparatory action is taken by secret ballot , if not a solution in its own sense ?

What is refers to the third paragraph of the operative part of the interpretative decision , I believe , that with it , the court has created a new constitutional norm . With pompously phraseology , gathered in one sentence ' legal and national security , the international prestige of the Republic of Bulgaria and extremely important public functions ... "is worded ban YOU to exercise constitutional your power in Article 125 of the Basic Law to examine administrative acts . Obviously for the Constitutional Court, the absence of judicial review is a guarantee of legal certainty .

Moreover interpretative decision in this way does not hold up , that in the country's state power is divided in legislative , executive and judicial - Article 8 of the Constitution ; that it implemented supreme supervision for precise and equal application of the laws in administrative justice and that assess the legality of acts of the Council of Ministers as and of other acts , set out in law - Article 125 of the Constitution .

Insofar need to be proposed interpretation , I think , that it should be is with the following content :

The proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution within the meaning of Art. 120, para 1 and Art. 125, para 2 are administrative acts .

SAC by virtue of Article 125, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution interpret and apply the law and assess whether it is there legal interest to be appealed act , followed by presidential decree .

The decrees , issued on the basis of the proposals in Article 98, item 6, Article 100, paragraph 1, item 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution , subject to the control of constitutionality by the Constitutional Court , which has the power to check and legality of the preceding them proposals , regardless of whether such verification is done by the judicial authority before it .

 