Special opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

No I agree with the decision of the Constitutional Court , according to which Article 33, paragraph 5 of the Act on taxation of income of physical persons - a new , prom . SG br.110 of 2001, not is unconstitutional . According to me the text contrary to Article 19, Paragraph 2, Article 60 and Article 84, item 3 of the Constitution . The considerations I have the following :

The new paragraph 5 to Article 33 of the Law on taxation of income of natural persons (PIT), established by § 11 of the Law on amendment and supplement of the Law for taxation of income of natural persons , provided , that the annual ( patent ) tax for activities , referred to in Article 31, item 6 letters "a" and "b", p.7 letters "a", "b", "c", "d", "k", "l", " m "," to "," x "," z "and" yu " is determined , as to the amount , determined by the order of 31, are added at 5 lev of kvadraten metar " gross area of the corresponding object . " In Decision № 6/1998 on a k.d . № 4/98, the ( prom ., SG br.35 of '98) , the Constitutional Court has stated , that " constitutional principles , of which have to comply with tax rules , including the requirement for establishment of taxes and determining the amount to them by the National assembly ”. This follows from Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution . Only with the law , and not with any and to any regulatory act of another state body , they can not be certain . This is also the case according to Article 84, item 3 of the Constitution , according to which the National Assembly not only establishes taxes , but also determines their amount . In that decision , the Constitutional Court accepted , that " a law is to be certain all indicators , through which can not be individualized rate of tax for each tax entity ." In the same sense, it is the decision № 9/1996 on a k.d . № 9/96 ( promulgated , SG, issue 58 of 96). The provisions challenged before the Constitutional Court do not define the concept of “ gross area of the respective site ”. Extracting him in argument from the opposite of the concept of " net trading area " consumed in § 1, item 18 of the additional provisions of PITA, not able to play the role of accurately and uniformly specified benchmark for all parties , subject to taxation with patent tax . There are no instructions in the law who and on what grounds will determine the " gross area of the site ". Could a different tax offices to put a different meaning in the concept of gross area of the site . So can not be seen inequality between the one and the same taxpayer , carrying one and the same activity . And this is contrary to Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution . Inequality in anticipated earnings , which are the basis for the amount of patent taxation , is increasing and by the fact , that the activities , for the implementation of which is required undoubtedly greater area , are taxed uniformly with a 5 lev . of kv.m . gross area more , as and activities , for the exercise of which is required much less space . So it will be even when a hypothesis of both activities is get one and the same income . Different professions according to their technological features require the use of different areas . From one space is needed as a watchmaker ( referred to in Article 31, paragraph 7, letter "k" PITA) and by another one upholsterer or mechanic ( referred to in Article 31, paragraph 7, letter "l" and " m ”ZODFL).

It can be noted at this , that for a number of activities , in essence similar to those , for which is required increase at 5 lev . per sq . m. gross area , no such increase is envisaged .

This is the case, for example, with barber services (Article 31, paragraph 1, letter "f"), typewriting services (Article 31, paragraph 1, letter "g"), cosmetic services (Article 31, paragraph 1, letter " h ") and others . The law does not contain a logical criterion , on the basis of which to become the additional taxation of square . m area . This is contrary to Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution , so as not create equal conditions for economic activity in patent taxed .

Besides the above it is to be noted , that according to Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution citizens are obliged to pay taxes according to their income and property . From what has been said above is visible , that the increase of the patent tax on the disputed law is not able always to be connected to all activities with income from the used larger area . The tax is not in line for everyone with their expected income . As is concerned , however, by the size of the area outside income , then it is an element of tax on property and not from income tax .

 