Dissenting opinion of Judge Lyudmil Neykov I find the request of the Prosecutor General to establish the unconstitutionality of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament to be justified due to the following: 1. The status of the candidate for MP and his / her deputy is not and cannot be the same, as the social significance of these two categories is different. In this regard, unjustifiably by the impugned legal provision, which creates a privilege, this status is equated.2. The sign "social status" in the sense of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution also characterizes the candidate for Member of Parliament, due to which he falls within the prohibition to use privileges according to the said constitutional provision. Criminal inviolability is a privilege that is based on the social status that the person occupies precisely in his capacity as a candidate for Member of Parliament, due to which he falls within the restrictions under Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution for obtaining privileges.3. The thesis that "the initiation of criminal proceedings or the detention of a candidate for Member of Parliament or his / her representative will irreparably infringe their rights…" is valid only in the one-sided consideration of the affected personal interests. whether the privilege of a candidate for Member of Parliament does not unjustifiably prevent the commencement and completion of criminal prosecution against a candidate suspected of a crime who has violated the law in violation of his constitutional obligation to comply with the laws and respect the rights and legitimate interests of others; .58, para 1 of the Constitution. In this case there is a competition between constitutional values, in which of a higher order is the one that protects the public (fight against crime) before personal interests - a principle contrary to which the attacked legal provision, which is why it is a counterconstriction institutional.4. The status of the candidate for Member of Parliament is different from that of the Member of Parliament, the Minister, the Constitutional Judge, etc. The Constitution protects them with immunity due to their official position, as the attribute "official position" is not among those explicitly listed in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, on the basis of which there is a prohibition on obtaining privileges. Therefore, based on the official position, which is beyond the exhaustively listed in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the constitutional legislator has provided only a few cases of immunity from prosecution, which do not include candidates for MPs and their deputies. The provision of such a privilege by law, which ignores the restrictions on the acquisition of privileges raised by Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as is the case, is unconstitutional.5. By Decision № 3/1998 under Code of Criminal Procedure № 1/1998 it was accepted that criminal irresponsibility, outside the cases specified in the Constitution, cannot be established by law. The decision adopted by this decision is in violation of this practice of the Constitutional Court.