to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on
constitutional case Mo 11 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of April 24, 2001, we were constituted as
interested party in constitutional case Me 11 for 2001,
formed at the request of 51 MPs from the 38th National Assembly
meeting to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 52, para. 6
of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP).

According to the group of MPs, Art. 52, para. 6 of the ZINP,
according to which the Prime Minister and Ministers continue
the exercise of their powers and after their registration as
candidates for MPs, contrary to Art. 65, para. 2, on
Art. Article 10 6, para. 2 of the Constitution.

1. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of art. 52, para. 6 from
ZINP with Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution

The assessment regarding the compliance of Art. 52, para. 6 of ZINP with art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution requires clarification of the content of
the term “civil service” within the meaning of this constitutional text.
At the request of a group of MPs, the Constitutional Court
brought proceedings in Mo 9 for 2001 for mandatory interpretation of the text in

meaning "whether>" the Prime Minister, "| Deputy Minister-
the chairmen and the ministers hold civil service within the meaning of Art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria ”. The Council of Ministers
is constituted as an interested party in the case and in the determinations of
the court term has submitted an opinion with its considerations. As
The Constitutional Court has not ruled on the request and has not entered
force decision, we believe that we should set out our considerations in this as well
position.

Conclusion on the content of the term “civil service” c
the meaning in which it is used in Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, may
to be made from what is stated in the reasons to Decision Me 5 of 1993 on
Constitutional Case Mo 6 of 1993, which states:

“In the Constitution, apart from Art. 68, para. 1 for civil service
speaks in Art. 65, para. 2. The concept is the basis of the provision of art.
116. It is common ground that the term 'civil service' must be understood as
unified and consistent meaning. In general, this is an activity
performing the functions of the state. This activity is performed
on behalf of the state and to exercise the powers provided for
in the Constitution its organs. "

The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in a Decision
Me 16 of 1997 on constitutional case Me 8 of 1997.

We fully share the opinion of the Constitutional Court
on the unified and consistent meaning of the term “state
service ”as an activity for performing the functions of the state,
which is done on behalf of the state and for implementation
the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution. The activity,
carried out by the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister,
presidents and ministers as sole bodies of state power and
as members of the highest collegial body of the executive power
it is indisputably an activity for the performance of the functions of the state which
they perform on behalf of the state and to exercise their powers
of its constitutional bodies. Therefore, they occupy the state
service within the meaning set out in the grounds of the decision of

The Constitutional Court. However, to determine whether occupied by them
civil service is included in the scope of the term “civil service” under
Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, it is necessary to assess not only
the nature of their activity, as well as the constitutional law
status of the Council of Ministers and its members. This also follows
from the reasons in the cited decision of the Constitutional Court, in which
says:

“.. in the absence of an unambiguous doctrinal or legal
definition of civil service the meaning and content of
the concept in individual cases must be disclosed in accordance with
the specific objectives of the regulations and the institutes to which it relates ...
However, this most general meaning of the term "civil service" does not exclude
and the peculiarities with which it is used in the Constitution and which it
acquires depending on its specific systematic place and from
the relevant legal institute with which it is directly related. Not possible
for example, to have an absolute coincidence in scope of the concept in Art. 68, para.
You art. 116. The logical and systematic interpretation of the two texts
leads to the conclusion that in Art. 116 refers to only one type of state
service - in the sphere of the executive power, of the state
administration in the proper sense of the word. While in Art. 68, para. 1 is available
given the wider scope of the concept. (The discrepancy from the point of view of
volume does not mean a contradiction in the general sense of the term, it
expresses only the differences between the types of civil service).

Clarification of the meaning of the term “civil service” under Art.
65, para. 2 of the Constitution in view of the constitutional status of
The Council of Ministers and its members, regulated in Chapter Five of
The Constitution, in our opinion, imposes the conclusion that this concept does not include
the posts of “the Prime Minister, <| Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers.

According to Chapter Five of the Constitution, ministers are sole proprietors
executive bodies, which are also members of
the collegial body of the executive power - the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers as a collegial body composed of

the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers,
manages and implements the domestic and foreign policy of the country,
ensures public order and national security, implements
the general management of the state administration and the Armed Forces,
directs the implementation of " state budget, organized
the management of the state property, concludes, approves and
denounce international treaties in the cases provided by law.

The members of the Council of Ministers receive their powers,
which the Constitution and laws connect only with them, through
their election by the National Assembly as provided for in the Constitution
ed. The Prime Minister is also a member of the Council of Ministers
directs and coordinates the general policy of the government and carries
responsibility for it, the deputy prime ministers and ministers are
members of the Council of Ministers and are responsible for their actions.
The powers of the Council of Ministers cannot be obtained in this way
to transfer to another. Ministers may, by order, delegate to
Deputy Ministers powers and determine their functions (Art.
26, para. 2 of the Administration Act), but they cannot delegate to them
powers which fall within their exclusive competence under
The Constitution and the laws. This applies above all to power
to be members of the Council of Ministers and to participate in the formation
at the will of the collegial body.

As stated in the request that the exit of the ministers and the
the prime minister on leave during the election campaign does not
leaves the state without a government, is true only insofar as going out in
leave means the cessation of functions, not
termination of powers. If we accept the interpretation that Art. 65,
al. 2 of the Constitution requires unconditionally the Prime Minister,
Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers to> terminate
performing its functions after registering to participate as
candidates in the election, this would mean accepting that Constitution
allows and even demands during the election campaign the state
to have a government that cannot fulfill its obligations to

supreme collegial body of the executive power due to contained in
the Constitution itself prohibits its members from performing
its functions. This would also mean that the constitutional and
the legal functions of the Prime Minister, Deputy Minister
the presidents and ministers remain without a medium during this period
and will not be implemented in practice. And the features that
The Constitution assigns the government are of a nature that does not
allows them to be interrupted at any time. Apparently this conclusion
is also shared by the constitutional legislator, who has created an explicit
regulation in such a sense - Art. 111, para. 3 of the Constitution provides that when
termination of the powers of the Council of Ministers and upon submission of
resignation before the newly elected National Assembly Council of Ministers
continues to perform its functions until a new one is selected
Council of Ministers. Since the Constitution does not allow interruption of
the performance of the functions of the Council of Ministers even in the hypothesis
of terminated powers under Art. 111 of the Constitution, there is none
reason to claim that it not only allows, but even requires such
interruption during the operation of the powers of
The Council of Ministers, as is the case under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution.

The constitutional requirement of Art. 65, para. 2 was played
incl. 49, para. 1 of the repealed Law on Election of Members of Parliament,
municipal councilors and mayors. By Decision of 13 September 1991 on
the legal status of the members of the Council of Ministers who registered
as candidates in parliamentary elections (SG, issue 80 of 1991),
The Grand National Assembly accepted that the provision of Art. 49, para. 1 of
ZINPOSK does not cover the Prime Minister, Deputy Minister-
presidents and ministers and that their powers continue to
are also performed after the registration for participation in the elections
due to the special status of the Council of Ministers as a supreme central council
constitutional body of the executive power. In Decision Mo 2 of 1991.
of the Constitutional Court in constitutional case Me 24 for 1991 on the occasion
this decision of the Grand National Assembly reads:

"In connection with the elections for MPs, municipal
councilors and mayors held on October 13, 1991, the People's
assembly with a decision of 13 September 1991 reasonably accepted that Art. 49
ZINPOSK does not apply to the members of the Ministerial
advice if they participate in the election, as in view of the functions and
the responsibilities of its members the country cannot be left without
incumbent government. ”

The perception of the conclusion that in the scope of the term “state
service ”under Art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution does not include the positions of
the Prime Minister, "| Deputy Prime Minister and
ministers, means that the imperative requirement of the constitutional
text does not apply to the persons holding the said posts and
therefore there is no contradiction between Art. 52, para. 6 of ZINP and Art. 65,
al. 2 of the Constitution.

2. Regarding the allegation of contradiction of art. 52, para. 6 from
ZINP with Art. Article 10 6, para. 2 of the Constitution

According to the group of MPs, the actual implementation
of the functions of the ministers and of the prime minister
inequality between them and the other candidates, which violated Art.
Article 10 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. The request does not state any arguments
MPs substantiate these claims.

According to Art. 10 of the Constitution, the elections are held on
based on universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot, a
according to art. 6, para. 2 all citizens are equal before the law and are not
allow no restrictions on rights or privileges based on
social status and others exhaustively listed in the text
signs.

The perception of the above that the constitutional
the legislator has excluded the posts of the Prime Minister,
the Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers in the circle of persons,
who are obliged to terminate the performance of their occupation
civil service, means that he has taken into account all the consequences of
exclusion and has foreseen and allowed this result. Therefore if

Art. 52, para. 6 of ZINP does not contradict art. 65, para. 2 of the Constitution, no
may seek a contradiction between the legal text and Art. 6, para. 2 and art. 10
of the Constitution, as the regulation in Art. 65, para. 2 is special on
regarding the regulation in art. b, para. 2 ивчл. 10.

Nevertheless, we do not consider that there are serious arguments in
support the claim that the expulsion of the Prime Minister,
Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers of the Circle of
obliged to terminate the performance of the occupied civil service
creates inequalities between candidates based on
their social status or on another grounds specified in Art. 6, para. 2
of the Constitution. The requirement to remove candidates from
the occupied civil service is focused on the one hand on insurance
of political neutrality in the performance of this service, which is
explicitly proclaimed in Art. 116, para. 1 of the Constitution and which would be difficult
could be done with the public engagement of the civil servant
with a political party or coalition, and on the other, to limit
the conditions for using the opportunities provided by the state
service, for the purposes of the election campaign. For members of
The Council of Ministers does not have a constitutional requirement to be
politically neutral, including during the operation of
their powers. Their activity of the state ones occupied by them
positions and the political biography with which they enter the election
campaign is associated with a particular political position, which is
public and known to the whole society. In this situation, no
no logic precisely in the period of the election campaign to
requires members of the government to suspend the implementation of
its functions to ensure political neutrality in the occupied by
them civil service. Accordingly, to limit the conditions for
use of the opportunities provided by the civil service for
objectives of the election campaign, there are legal guarantees in
the texts of the Law on Radio and Television and the Law on Public Procurement, which are applied
and perform and whose observance is monitored by other bodies. Activity of
the members of the Council of Ministers in this capacity is a public activity

and it cannot remain hidden from society. This publicity and
the legal rules for conducting and financing the election campaign
campaign actually hinder the use of the state
service for the purposes of the election campaign, not going on leave to
members of the Council of Ministers, which in itself does not limit
the opportunities they have in this capacity.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 52,
al. 6 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament is unfounded and

should be rejected. 7