Dissenting opinion of Judge Rumen Yankov As a rule, historically, public state property has been presented as the antithesis of private and municipal property. And the term is often used vaguely to cover a number of actions related to the restriction of other types - the nationalization of the private (in the recent past) and the restriction or withdrawal of the municipal (as is the case discussed below). health (EPH) are an illustration of this line of thought. Thus, the transitional provisions of the EPA provide for public health facilities to be only those established by the Council of Ministers, regardless of the existence of norms governing the right to municipal property. The Constitution in Article 140 stipulates that the municipality has its own property, which uses in the interest of the territorial community. And Art. 17, para 4 stipulates that “The regime of the objects of state property is determined by law”. Several conclusions are imposed from the texts: the restoration of the Constitution of 1971 is proclaimed (SG, issue 29/90). ) and the right to municipal property denied by the 1947 Constitution. The distinction between state and municipal property is established. An independent settlement of their regime is envisaged, as in fact a regime means the acquisition, content and protection. Within the term under § 2, para 3 of the transitional provisions of the Constitution, the Law on Local Self-Government and Local Administration (LLSGA), SG , issue 29/91. Pursuant to § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the same law from the objects of the municipal infrastructure of local significance, intended for administrative needs of the municipality, as well as for health, cultural, commercial and household services, become its property (amendments to SG, issue 49/95 and issue 26/2000 do not apply to hospitals). The rule that hospitals of local importance are the property of municipalities is repeated by Art. .2 of the Municipal Property Act. From the above follows the conclusion that the hospitals are inherently declared public municipal property. An argument that the hospitals are not public state property is Article 2 of the State Property Act. Its provision can be summarized - these are the properties intended for "permanent satisfaction of public needs of national importance through common use." The right of the legislator under Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution is to determine the regime of state and municipal property. The right of ownership should be understood as the content of the powers, expressed in the unchanged trinity of time - use, possession and disposal. The power of disposal, in turn, is expressed in the possibility for the owner to alienate, encumber or establish encumbrances in respect of his own right. But just as the classical right to property expands over time in terms of property (intellectual, commercial property, intangibles, etc.), so do the forms of influence through the right of disposal also mark development. Thus, the right to dispose must now unconditionally include the power by which a decision can be taken to transform and privatize certain property. And an order in this case is present because they cease to be municipal property within the meaning of the law the property and belongings of the companies, even if the municipality was their sole owner - Article 2, paragraph 4 of the LPA and Article 104, paragraph 1 of the LPA. . As a result, the decision to determine the size of the units and shares and to alienate them as a variant of the right of disposal cannot be taken by the municipality. Therefore, outside the prerogatives of the Council of Ministers, which by virtue of Article 106 of the Constitution is authorized to manage only state property, is to delegate to a minister or the Privatization Agency the right to decide on the privatization of municipal property. Legal norms in this sense contradict the Constitution, namely that the state is united with local self-government, and that the municipality has the right to property, which is used in the interest of the territorial community - Article 2, paragraph 1 and Article 140 of the Constitution. As a type of property, the municipal public property according to art. 17, para 1 of the Constitution, on an equal footing with the others, is guaranteed and protected by law. Her right to protection is guaranteed by way of exclusion - no kind of property right can be infringed outside the hypothesis of art. 17, para 5. It is these guarantees and protection that are denied and violated by the Medical Establishments Act. In a market economy oriented society, the right to property is an institution of civil law and its content can be limited only by the owner, except when the prerequisites for expropriation within the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. Indeed, by virtue of Article 52, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law, the state is authorized to exercise control over all health care institutions. However, such strict control is envisaged to be carried out to the maximum extent under Part Three of the Health Insurance Act: a commission appointed by the Minister of Health prepares the regional health card, which is then approved by the Minister - Article 32 of the law; The envisaged strict registration and permitting regime for the opening of hospitals of any kind in the same law is also carried out directly by the Minister of Health. And another important thing: The Law on Municipal Property is one of those under Chapter One of the Constitution - Basic Principles voted by the National Assembly on the grounds of § 3, para 3 of the transitional and final provisions. Indeed, a constitutional delegation is also provided for in Article 52, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution, but as far as health insurance and financing of health care are concerned. It is inadmissible for the initial regime of the right to municipal property to be derogated from by norms of another law, which does not have as its subject the basic constitutional principles. From the point of view of this general statement the following texts of PPA contradict the Constitution: 65/2000, according to which the existing public health establishments for hospital care are transformed into medical establishments - sole proprietorships, by order of the Minister of Health by September 1, 2000. The generic term “public health establishments for hospital care” is used. it cannot be understood otherwise than as including state and public municipal property. If the text is applied, it must be assumed that the powers include the right to dispose in the above sense of a body of executive power, instead of a body of local self-government. The provision of Article 102, paragraph 1 provides that public health facilities for outpatient care are also transformed by order of the Minister into sole proprietorships, the text referring to outpatient clinics for primary and group medical care, medical and dental centers, medical-dental and diagnostic-consulting centers, as well as independent laboratories of this type. Insofar as the mentioned establishments are public municipal property, as they are unconditionally part of the local health infrastructure and the fact that even in this case their right to a share is not recognized, the provision is obviously unconstitutional. The disputed provision of Art. 104, para. 1 LPH is related to the ones discussed above. It cannot have an independent existence, as its hypothesis does not include norms commented above, which are unconstitutional. And since the premise contradicts the Constitution, the consequences cannot be qualified in any other way. Ultimately, the disputed norms have nothing to do with the powers of the state under Article 52, paragraph 5 of the Constitution to exercise control over all health facilities in the country. They can be seen as a targeted privatization of the hospital business.