Opinion
by Dr. Ilko Semerdzhiev - Minister of Health
in the constitutional case Ho 18/2000

Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

A request was made by 57 MPs to establish
the unconstitutionality of the provisions of Art. 101, para. | and 5, Art. 102, para. | ichl.
104, para. | of the Medical Establishments Act (promulgated, SG No. 62/1999, supplemented, SG No. 88
from 1999, amended, no. 113 of 1999, amended, no. 114 of 1999, as amended. and add., no. 36 of
2000, no. 65 of 2000, no. 108 of 2000), as well as a request for the establishment of
inconsistency of art. 109, para. 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or under
proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the same law with the European one
charter for local self-government (promulgated SG, issue 46 of 20
00).

With a ruling of 18.01.2001 of the Constitutional Court the request was admitted for
examination on the merits, and the Minister of Health is constituted as
interested party.

The request contains the following allegations:

1. The provisions of art. 101, para. | and 5 of the Medical Establishments Act (PHA)
contradict Art. 140 of the Constitution and of Art. 21, para. 1, item Type of the Law on
the local self-government and the local administration and art. 8 in connection with art. 2, para. 1,
item bid from the Municipal Property Act (MPA).

P. The provision of art. 101, para. 5 of the PPA is in contradiction with Art. 17, para. 5 from
The Constitution.

Sh. The provision of art. 102, para. | of the PPA contradicts by analogy with Art. 140 and Art.
17, para. 5 of the Constitution.

TU. The provision of Art. 104, para. | of the PPA contradicts the provisions of Art. 7, para.
2 of ZOS, of art. 7, para. | of the State Property Act (STA) and of Decision Ho
5/2000 on k. e. He 4 of 2000 of the Constitutional Court.

U. The provision of art. 109, para. 1 of the PPA is in contradiction with the principles of Art. 4, vol.
2 and 4 of the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECHR).

M1. The acts of the Minister of Health for transformation for the municipal ones
health establishments are null and void, in view of which and on the grounds of Art. 22, para. 3 of
The Constitutional Court Act to be declared null and void.

I express the following opinion on the allegations made in the request:

1. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 101, para. You
5 of 3 LZ:

1 The petitum of the request states that it is claimed that
unconstitutionality of the entire provision of Art. 101, para. 1 of the PPL. IN
the circumstantial part of the request is written: “According to the provisions of Art. 101,
al. | of the Public Health Insurance Act, all public health care facilities for hospital care are transformed
in sole proprietorships by order of the Minister of Health.
Referred to municipal hospitals, the provision means that the Minister
has illegally disposed of foreign (municipal) and not state property. ”

According to Art. 101, para. | of the Medical Establishments Act the existing ones
public health care facilities, dispensaries and hospitals
diagnostic and treatment structures at> higher medical schools
transform into medical establishments - sole proprietorships, by order of
the Minister of Health by September 2000

I believe that the request of the MPs refers only to
the transformation of public health institutions for hospital care into medical ones
establishments whose owner of the capital is the respective municipal council.

In view of this, I ask for the request to establish the unconstitutionality of
Art. 101, para. | of the PPA to be allowed only in respect of these medical
establishments (“municipal hospitals”).

2. The statement that with the provisions of art. 101, a. | and 5 of the PPA, the Minister of
Healthcare has disposed of foreign (municipal) property, not state property
property is incorrect. This is because the order to convert one
health institution in a medical institution - a sole proprietorship is not an act of
disposal of property and does not contradict Art. 140 of the Constitution.

The provisions of Art. 101, para. 1 and 5 of the PPA are directly related to the new legal regime
of medical institutions and with the change of the status of the existing health ones
establishments that are found by the new PPA.

Until the entry into force of the Medical Establishments Act - 12.07.1999, the Law on
public health (EPH) regulates the status of health facilities. According to Art.
Ta, al. 2 of the EPA (as amended on 02.04.1999) the medical care of the population
is organized by health facilities - public and private, and medical
specialists in private medical practice. Paragraph 2 of the Additional
provisions of the EPA contain a legal definition of the term "public health
establishments "- these are those establishments, which are established by the Council of Ministers for
the needs of public health. Pursuant to Art. 2, para. 2 of the EPA publicly
health institution is opened, transformed and closed by the Council of Ministers under
proposal of the Minister of Health. The proposal is agreed with
the municipal council, when the public health institution serves mainly
the population of the municipality on whose territory it is located. The law of the people
Health does not divide public health facilities into state and municipal and no
provides powers to the municipal council to create, transform or close

public health facilities. This is because the activities of public health
establishments is of public importance and it does not matter whose property is provided
their management and administration. For the legislator, her activities were leading
its financing. The creation, transformation and closure of public ones
Health facilities have never been the authority of local authorities
self-government.

The provisions of Art. 101 - 107 of the PPA are directly related to bringing
existing public health facilities for outpatient and inpatient care in
compliance with the requirements of the new law, ie with the change of their status - from
public health facilities - legal entities on budget support, they become
medical establishments - commercial companies.

3. The legislator has assigned not to the Council of Ministers, but to a person specifically designated by
him another body of executive power - the Minister of Health with a special
order to transform the existing public health facilities into hospital and
outpatient care under the terms and conditions established by law (Articles 101-104 of 3LZ).

The change in the status of public health facilities that are established by
The Council of Ministers for the needs of public health is not a power
of the municipal council. With the provisions of art. 101 - 104 of the PPA, the legislator has given
powers of the Minister of Health, as the central body of the
the executive branch, which conducts and is responsible for the state policy in
healthcare, to transform existing public health
establishments in medical establishments by | March 2000 for outpatient care, and until 1
September 2000 for hospital care. Thus the legislator has created
guarantee for a unified and uniform approach in the transformation into medical establishments of
the public health establishments established over the years by the Council of Ministers.
The Minister of Health is obliged to comply with legal provisions
to “carry out a one-off and timely transformation of the status of
existing public health facilities throughout the country.
The territorial location in the country of the medical establishments in accordance with
public needs for medical care is a guarantee for the realization of
the constitutional right of citizens to affordable medical care.

The competence delegated by the National Assembly to the Minister of
healthcare is severely limited. The legislator has precisely defined the establishments
which are subject to transformation - the existing public health facilities,
as well as the type of medical institution in which they should be transformed. It is in
the competence of the Minister of Health is to establish the compliance of
the existing public health institution with the introduced new specific ones
characteristics and requirements to the medical establishments - art. 16 - 23; Art. 57 - 81 of
З3ЛЗ. The legislator also determines the legal organizational form of the new medical services
establishments - sole proprietorships with limited liability or sole proprietorships
joint stock companies (Art. 101, para. Gichl. 102, para. | of 3LZ).

In the hypotheses of Art. 101-104 of the Health Insurance Act, the Minister of Health acts in
the conditions of "bound competence", ie he does not dispose of
property. In these cases, the minister only changes the status - transforms
the existing public health establishments in medical establishments - commercial
companies with municipal property by applying the law in compliance with the established
form and requirements.

4. The provisions of art. 101, para. | and 5, Art. 102, para. | and Art. 104, para. | from LPH no
contradict the principles of the rule of law, local self - government and
protection of property and due to the following:

a) According to the Constitution, self - government is exercised within
the municipality, which is a basic administrative-territorial unit (art. 136, para 1).
In decision Ho 9 of the Constitutional Court under Code He 6 of 2000 was adopted
the opinion that by giving the municipalities the status of a legal entity (Art. 136,
al. 3) with its own bodies, property and budget (Art. 140 and Art. 141, para 1), the Constitution
regulates local self-government as a form of decentralization of state
power in order to increase the role of self-governing communities in resolving
issues of local importance. In this regard, ie "to regulate and manage in
within the law, on their responsibility and in the interest of their population,
an essential part of public affairs "(in the words of Article 3 of the European Charter of
local self-government) are also the powers of municipal councils.

6) The LPZ imperatively indicates the body that also exercises the rights of
ownership of the capital of the new medical establishments - commercial companies (Art.
101, para. 6 of the PPL). The text of Art. 101, para. 6 of the PPA corresponds to Art. 9, para. 3, vol. Goth
the law, which depending on the territorial scope of the served population
defines the medical establishments for hospital care as regional ones when they serve
the population of one or neighboring municipalities. Only with the PPA was the criterion introduced
establishments are of local importance and which of national. Depending on that
the legislator has determined who will be the owner of the capital of the medical institutions
establishments. The municipality is the sole owner of the capital of all establishments for
outpatient and inpatient care that are of local importance. In the implementation of
the law in all transformation orders issued by the Minister of
Healthcare on the grounds of art. 101, para. | ibichl. 102, para. | from LPH, it is explicit
stated that the rights of the municipality as sole owner of the capital of
the medical institution for outpatient or inpatient care are exercised by
the relevant municipal council.

Thus, defending the principle of local self-government, the legislator
has determined the municipality as the sole owner of the capital of these medical facilities
facilities, as they will provide outpatient and inpatient medical care to
the population living in its territory. By entering the converted
health facilities in the Commercial Register, the municipal council will exercise the rights
of the municipality as a sole owner of the capital of the respective medical facility
place.

c) The application of the provisions of art. 101 and 102 of the PPA is directly related to
guaranteed in Art. 52, para. | of the Constitution rights of citizens - the right to
health insurance guaranteeing them affordable medical care and the right to
free use of medical care. This constitutional provision does not
is directly applicable and states that it will apply under the same conditions,
determined by law. With the Health Insurance Act, the Medical Insurance Act
establishments, the Public Health Act and the Professional Organizations Act of
doctors and dentists are regulated basic public relations,
affecting these constitutional rights, such as the immediate exercise of
the right to medical care is provided in medical institutions.

In view of the above, I consider that the provision of Art. 140 from
The Constitution and the texts mentioned by the PPA do not constitute an order with
municipal property.

P. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 101, para. 5
от3ЛЗ:

With the provision of art. 101, para. 5 of the PPA not with nationalization in
contradiction with art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution.

According to Art. 101, para. 5 of the Health Insurance Act with the transformation of the public health establishments
according to the application in medical institutions - joint stock companies, property
on their capital is acquired by:

1. the state and is managed by the Minister of Health - for 51 per cent of
capital;

2. the municipalities of the district, whose population the medical establishment serves - for 49 of
one hundred of the capital; "The shareholding of the municipalities is proportional to
the population living in the respective municipalities.

In this case (Article 101, paragraph 5 of 3LZ) there is no coercion
expropriation, nor nationalization of municipal property, but a mixed one was created
form of government - between the state and the municipalities located on the territory
of one area.

In Art. 2 of the Municipal Property Act indicate which real estates they are
municipal property, between which by virtue of para. 1, item 6 are also the objects of
municipal infrastructure of local importance, designed for health
servicing the population of the respective municipality. Listed in the annex
to Art. 101, para. 5 of the PHA united regional (former districts) hospitals serve
the population of the respective district, and not only the population of the municipality - district
center. These medical establishments have a status under Art. 9, para. 3, item 2 of the PPA - regional
hospitals.

Due to these characteristics of the united regional hospitals, the legislator is
provided for a mixed form of government by determining the legal and organizational
form - joint stock company. Thus in the management of the hospital have
participation of both the Minister of Health and local authorities
self-government of the population from the whole district.

In view of the above, the statement that with the provision of Art. 101, para. 5 of the PPA is
nationalization of the municipal property in contradiction with art. 17, para.
5 of the Constitution is unfounded.

Sh. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of Art. 102, para. 1
from 3 LZ:

It is incorrect to claim that with the provision of Art. 102, para. | by the Minister of Public Health
of healthcare has disposed of foreign (municipal) property, not with
state property.

In this regard, I support the reasons set out in item Gi P of the opinion. Like
proof that neither an order nor a nationalization has been carried out with
municipal property we apply court decisions for registration of medical
establishments - sole proprietorships in the respective courts. In these acts
it is explicitly written that with their transformation the respective Municipal Council
exercises the rights of sole owner of the capital of medical establishments,

that is, from the moment of their court registration, the Municipal Council manages
medical establishments and may dispose of them.

It should be borne in mind that in compliance with the provisions of Art. 101, para. | ichl.
102, para. | of the Health Insurance Act, the Minister of Health within the terms specified by law
has issued conversion orders. According to data from the Regional Centers on
Healthcare, these are about 340 outpatient hospitals and 140
medical establishments for hospital care. They are registered in the respective districts
courts. "Medical institutions for> outpatient care have received
certificate from the Regional Health Centers, and most of
the medical establishments for hospital care have received a permit for implementation
of medical activity by the Minister of Health. This is how it is completed
the process of aligning existing public health
establishments with the provisions of the Medical Establishments Act.

TU. On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 104, para. 1
от3ЛЗ:

This request should not be considered by the Constitutional Court, as in
the request does not specify which text of the Constitution contradicts the provision of
Art. 104, para. | from ZLZ. It is alleged that that provision is contrary to the provisions of
Art. 7, para. 2 of the AIA Art. 7, para. | of the LSA in view of which and on the grounds of Art. 149, para. 1
of the Constitution in connection with Art. 12, para. 1 of the Constitutional Court Act
the request should not be considered.

Nevertheless, I believe that the PPA is special in relation to the above
provisions - art. 7, para. 2 of the AIA Art. 7, para. | from ZDS.

Acquisition, management, administration and disposal of real estate
properties - municipal property is regulated by the Municipal Property Act,
unless otherwise provided by a special law (Article 1 of the AIA). By virtue of the PPL
(art. 104, para. 1 of 3LZ) with the transformation of the public health establishments
movable and immovable property provided for management and administration -
state or municipal property, included in the balance sheets of health care institutions,
on the basis of which they are transformed, becomes the property of the companies.

U. On the request for establishing a discrepancy of art. 109, para. 1, item 3
on the words "after approval or on the proposal of the Minister of
Health ”from the same law with the European Charter of Local
self:

The provision of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPA is not in contradiction with the principles of art.
4, items 2 and 4 of the ECMS. This is evident from the text of Art. 3, item 1, art. 4, item Gi33 from EHMS.
The European Charter of Local Self-Government also allows for the “assignment of
duties of another authority according to the scale and nature of the task and
the requirements for efficiency and economy ”, and in Art. 3, vol. | ichl. 4, item | i2 is explicit
recorded that the powers of local governments are within
of the law.

Articles 29 - 34 of the PPA regulate the planning and distribution of
territorial principle of the public interest in medical care, and in Art. 30 from
The Public Health Insurance Act regulates the elaboration of regional health cards, which according to Art. 31
contain the geographical boundaries of the health regions; type, number, activity and
the distribution of the medical establishments under art. 29, ал. | in the area; countof doctors
and dentists in outpatient care by specialties. Based on the data

from the regional health cards a National Health Card is prepared, which is
approves by a decision of the Council of Ministers on a proposal of the Minister of
Healthcare. This was done with Decision He 688 of the Council of Ministers of 4.11.1999 for
approval of the National Health Card of the Republic of Bulgaria.

In view of the above, I consider that the text of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 ”of the decisions
for privatization and all actions related to the privatization procedure are
take from: municipal councils after approval or on the proposal of the Minister of
Healthcare - for the medical establishments with municipal participation, carrying out “ev
compliance with national health interests. The text of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPL
not only is it not in conflict with the principles of Art. 4, items 2 and 4 of the EHMS, aev
compliance with them, as both texts of the Charter state that
the powers of local self-government bodies are determined by law and
may be restricted only within the law.

With the provision of art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPA, the executive power has the opportunity
to pursue a national health policy with a view to accessibility and to protect
the interests of the population in the country and the municipality.

Y1. Upon the request based on Art. 22, para. 3 of the Constitutional Court Act
the acts of the Minister of Health for transformation to be announced
for void:

I consider that the request for annulment of the acts of the Minister of
healthcare on the grounds of art. 22, para. 3 of the Constitutional Court Act is
inadmissible. The powers of the Constitutional Court are exhaustively stated in
Art. 149 of the Constitution. According to Art. 149, para. 1, item 2 of the Constitution
The Constitutional Court rules on a request for> establishment of
unconstitutionality of the laws and other acts of the National Assembly,
as well as the acts of the President. Repeal of acts issued by the Minister of
health care is not within the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court.

The acts of the Minister of Health for the transformation of the existing ones
Health establishments that are issued in implementation of the PHA cannot be
acts issued by an incompetent body within the meaning of Art. 22, para. 3 of the Law on
The Constitutional Court, At the time of their issuance the Minister of
healthcare was competent to issue them.

In view of this and in view of the provision of Art. 151, para. 2 of the Constitution please yes
you are not considering the request.

Notwithstanding the above, I believe that according to Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution
The Supreme Administrative Court rules on disputes over the legality of
the acts of the Council of Ministers and of the ministers, as well as of other acts specified
in the law. Pursuant to Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution and Art. 5, para. | of the Law on
The Supreme Administrative Court has jurisdiction to rule on
the request made.

In this regard, I note that with decision Xe 7208 of 29.11.2000 under Adm. e.
4432/2000, the Supreme Administrative Court, 5-member panel, with upheld
transformation order issued by the Minister of Health on the grounds
Art. 102, para. | from 3ZLZ. In the same sense is decision 6419 of 24.10.2000 under Adm. e.
Ho 2479/2000 of the Supreme Administrative Court, W Division (entered into force).
I enclose copies of the above court decisions of the SAC.

Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

In view of the above, please reject the request of the people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of the provisions of
Art. 101, para. You 5, art. 102, para. Gichl. 104, para. | of the Medical Establishments Act,
as well as the request for establishing non-compliance with Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 regarding
the words “after approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health” of
the same law as the European Charter of Local Self-Government.

Applications:
1. decisions Xe 7208 of 29.11.2000 and 6419 of 24.10.2000 of the SAC;

2. 480 pcs. court decisions for entry in the Commercial Register of
the transformed health facilities.