Dear Mr. President,

According to the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, game is a national treasure.
Current practice confirms that the conservation, feeding and resettlement of game
is an extremely labor-intensive activity, which is carried out successfully in the narrowest
cooperation of the National Development Fund with the centennial organization of hunters and fishermen.

Feeding the game in winter conditions is unthinkable without constant care
and the active work of hunters.

Selective shooting, breeding of game with high trophy qualities,
the regulation of the sex ratio of animal populations is possible only with
the participation of hunters who have the necessary knowledge and experience in breeding.

Poaching is a terrible scourge for game, and the fight against it is becoming increasingly difficult
dangerous. With the limited number of hunting and forest guards, the fight against poaching
can be successful only with the active participation of one hundred and twenty thousand organized
hunters - members of SLRB.

According to forest statistics from April 2000 until now in different regions of the country
1796 wolves, 19537 jackals, 31661 foxes and over 21730 stray dogs roam and
others that inflict great mischief on the game. Without the active participation of hunters in the
It is unthinkable to fight them to exterminate the predators.

The dedicated work of the hunters for the protection, breeding

net and resettlement of game.

The achievements in this direction are definite. Without close and active cooperation
of the National Development Fund with the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria is impossible to develop
of a modern and highly productive game farm, which is one of the first
places in Europe.

In connection with certain provisions of the Hunting and Game Protection Act (promulgated SG,
no. 78/2000) we consider it necessary to express the following opinion:

1. In our opinion, the legal provision of Art. 4 of ZLOD is in contradiction with art. 4,
al. 2 of the Constitution, as it seizes the functions and rights of the public organization of
hunters (SLRB) and assigns this activity (according to art. 34) - the management of the game, to
performed by other Bulgarian legal entities. Probably referring to her entry
the protection of some economic groups and illegitimate entities. This circumstance
as a clause raises special concerns for the future of the hunting farm in Bulgaria!

2. It is inadmissible with the provisions of ZLOD to proceed to the compulsory one
illegal destruction of the organizational structure of the current association -
SLRB, by seizing the activity (and bioecological!).

In view of the above considerations, we propose that the Constitutional Court annul it
in the established order those texts from the Law for hunting and protection of the game, which enter into
sharp contradiction with the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and restrict the exercise
of economic activity by the century-old public organization of hunters (SLRB), related
with priority to the breeding, reproduction and enrichment of the genetic fund, and

the biodiversity of animal populations and the conservation of game wealth.