Special opinion of judges Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Vasil Gotsev and Lyudmil NeykovI. We signed Decision № 11 of 21 May 2001 under c.d. № 18 of 2000 with a special opinion because we believe that the provision of Article 101, paragraph 5 of the Medical Establishments Act (PHA) is not unconstitutional. Our considerations are the following: The provision provides for the transformation of the public health establishments listed in the appendix to medical establishments - joint stock companies, ownership of their capital to be acquired by 51 percent of the state and 49 of the municipalities in the district whose population the medical establishment serves. The shareholding of the municipalities is proportional to the population living in the respective municipalities. The annex to art. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health includes 26 regional hospitals. These public health facilities have always served the population of all municipalities within the former district, now a district, and not only the population of the municipality - district center. They are not objects of infrastructure of local importance and are not intended to serve only the population of the municipality. Therefore, they are regional, ie. they serve the population from a larger territory - a region, not a municipality. Regional hospitals do not meet the requirements of Article 2, paragraph 1, items 6 and 9 of the LPA and § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the LGMSA to be part of the municipal infrastructure of local importance and to be designed to serve the population of the respective municipality. Therefore, they are not municipal property. This is confirmed by the wording of the last sentence of item 2 of the discussed paragraph and by the transcripts of the 276th sitting of the National Assembly of June 24, 1999 during the discussion and adoption of the PPA. In the normative acts the word “local” determines the relevance to the borders, the territory of the respective municipality. Such is its content in the constitutional provisions (for example in art. 138) in the Local Elections Act, in art. 5, art. 17, para 2 and 3, art. 22 LLSGA. That is why it has an established legal significance. In view of this and taking into account the requirement of Article 8 of the Law on Normative Acts, it should be assumed that its content is the same in § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of LLSGA. Therefore, in the sense of this text of local importance are those objects of municipal infrastructure that are intended for the needs and services of a municipality. The provisions of the State Property Act are incorrectly used to specify what is state property and vice versa, by argument otherwise, the objects of municipal property are determined. This is directly done by the Municipal Property Act (MPA), in which Article 2, paragraph 1, items 6 and 9 explicitly states that in order to be municipal property health facilities must serve the population of the municipality. The idea that municipal property is only what serves the needs of a municipality, its population, has found expression in the wording of Article 140 of the Constitution, according to which municipal property is used in the interests of the territorial community. The municipality in which the seat of the district hospital is located cannot use this health institution only in the interest of its territorial community and thus challenge the same for the population of the other municipalities in the district. The opinion that the district hospitals are municipal property, although they serve the population of several municipalities, contradicts Article 2, paragraph 1, items 6 and 9 of the AIA, and hence Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution, which is why we consider such an opinion inconsistent with the basic law. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health is not expropriated municipal property, because such does not exist on the regional hospitals, indicated in the appendix to this text. On the contrary, the municipalities acquire ownership of part of the capital of the commercial companies into which the regional hospitals are transformed. Given the purpose of these hospitals, the fact that they are not municipal property cannot be assumed that Art. .5 LPH violates the principles of local self-government or that the nationalization of municipal property has been carried out, that it has been turned into state property, which violates the provisions of Article 17, paragraph 5 and Article 140 of the Constitution. in all its paragraphs it is in compliance with the property of the existing public health establishments and the disputed para 5 of this provision refers only to state, but not to foreign (municipal) property. Judges Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova and Vasil Gotsev signed the decision with a special opinion with regard to Article 109, paragraph 1, item 3 of the Law on Public Health. The provision is from the section governing the privatization of medical institutions. The request does not object to privatization and the rights of municipal councils in this process. The restrictive requirement for the decision for privatization of medical establishments with municipal participation, providing hospital care, to be taken by the municipal councils after approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health is disputed. The petitioners consider that the participation of the Minister of Health limits the municipal councils in exercising their competencies. The health of the citizens is a constitutionally proclaimed value and its protection is assigned to the state, to which the Constitution with art. 52, para 5 also provides control functions. on all health facilities. The structure of the health network and its functioning are included in the constitutionally assigned obligations of the state. The implementation of preliminary control by the central executive power over the privatization of health care facilities with municipal participation is a concrete manifestation of the state's control functions over these facilities. The provision of Art. 109, para 1 of the LPA in its disputed part is in accordance with Art. 52, para 5 of the Constitution, therefore it is not unconstitutional. contrary to the principles of Article 4, items 2 and 4 of the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECMS). According to Article 4, item 2 of the ECMS, local governments have within the law full freedom to take the initiative on each an issue which is not excluded from their competence or delegated to another authority. The second sentence of item 4 of Article 4 of the ECMS states that the powers of local governments may be challenged or limited by another authority, central or regional, only within the law. From these provisions of the ECMS it follows that the powers of the local self-government bodies are within the limits set by law. When this law - in the case of the PPA, is not unconstitutional, as explained above, there is no inconsistency of Article 109, paragraph 1, item 3 of the PPL in its disputed part with the EHMS. On the contrary, there is full compliance of the PPL with the ECMS.