Dissenting opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov I have signed the decision under c.d. № 1/2001 with a special opinion, because I consider that the provision of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act (TFP ZDS) is not unconstitutional due to the following considerations: 1. The current legal system in Bulgaria does not know different concepts of property rights. One regulated at the level of law (traditional in the Property Act, and intellectual property rights - in the Copyright and Related Rights Act, the Patents Act, the Trademarks and Industrial Designs Act). The other, regulated at the level of the Constitution, which has a broader meaning, covering other property rights, including receivables. The provisions of the Constitution, which deal with the right to property and specifically Article 17, do not redefine this real right, do not include content in it, different from the accepted and established in the current objective law in the country, ie established by law. According to this constitutional provision, the right to property is guaranteed and protected by law. Private property has been declared inviolable. Guarantee and protection are proclaimed, referring to law. The reference to the right to inherit along with the right to property means that a guarantee and protection are also provided to the right to inherit, also referring to law. The constitutional provision of Article 17, paragraph 1 treats both rights in the same way in terms of being guaranteed and protected by law, but not in terms of their content or the legal means for their protection. It is provided for settlement by law. The wording of the provision does not define a broader content of the right of ownership. It does not give grounds to assume that it includes all property rights, therefore even the bond rights, which would erase a significant difference between property and bond rights. The constitutional legislator did not have such a will to turn it into a constitutional provision . From the transcripts of the one hundred and fiftieth sitting of the Grand National Assembly of 12 June 1991 it is established that upon the adoption of Article 17 of the Constitution no new content of the right of ownership was proposed or discussed other than that established by the laws of the country. Such a question did not exist at all for the constitutional legislator. On the contrary - it is clarified that the protection of property proclaimed in Art. 17, para 1 of the Constitution is also protection of intellectual property, which must find its further specification and development in the law. Insertion in the constitutional provision of a broader meaning of the law of property has no support in the wording of the provisions of the Basic Law and contradicts the will of the constitutional legislator. It cannot be motivated by unconstitutional considerations. Rather, they would be an expression of views on a possible future change in the constitutional framework. The Basic Law can and should be applied as it is. The provision of Article 17 of the Constitution treats the right to property, which is regulated by the laws of the country. This constitutional provision is not applicable to other property rights not specified in it. Their owners do not have the protection and inviolability inherent only in property rights. The opposite understanding leads to an unconstitutional result, because instead of a guarantee and enhanced protection of his right, the owner will be in a more unfavorable position than the one constitutionally proclaimed for him.2. Paragraph 6 of the TFR Act implements the rule-making power of the National Assembly regarding the regime of state property, constitutionally recognized by Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution (Decision № 10 of 1996 under Code of Civil Procedure № 8 of 1996). .). Reduction of the term for which the right of use on private state property has been established is a consequence of the radical change of the economic system of Bulgaria - from a centralized planning, based on free economic initiative (Article 19, paragraph 1 of the Constitution). This is inevitably accompanied by a change in the legal framework of property rights. This change is also carried out through the adoption of the Law on State Property, which imposes a new regulation on the limited real right to use private state property, specifically with regard to the term for which it can be established. The previous Constitution of 1971 allowed gratuitous and indefinite assignment of the use of state property and thus a part of the existing legal relations to which § 6 of the TFR of the LSA arose. In a market economy, private state property must also be rationally used in accordance with dynamically changing economic conditions, which requires legislative change. Through it, all users of private state property are placed under equal legal conditions for economic activity - both those who have acquired the right of use before and those who acquired it after the adoption of the Law on State Property. This legal decision fully complies with Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law.3. In principle, the Constitution does not exclude the right of the National Assembly to adopt norms retroactively. Such an exception is explicitly provided for in Article 5, paragraph 3 of the Constitution on criminal liability, but there is obviously no general prohibition on other cases (Decision № 18 of 1997 under Code of Criminal Procedure № 12 of 1997). in the field of substantive civil law, the adoption of a retroactive law, although a rare and in principle undesirable phenomenon because it is related to surprise, is not something unique (Decision № 9 of 1992 under Code of Civil Procedure № 4 of 1992). ). The reverse effect of the disputed provision of § 6 TFP ZDS does not violate the Constitution or the principle of the rule of law.4. As a continuation of the stated in item 1 of this special opinion on the constitutional regulation of the right of property it should be pointed out that para 5 of art. 17 of the basic law has no application and due to the fact that in this case there is no expropriation, ie. . change of ownership, and termination of the legal relationship by reducing the period during which it may exist. If damages have arisen as a result, their reparation will be obtained through the compensations provided for in the applicable civil law. They do not need to be repeated in the contested provision in order to be enforced by a judicial authority.