OPINION
FROM SHELL BULGARIA AD

According to Kld. Ho 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

On behalf of Shell Bulgaria AD please accept, at -
forward, the satisfaction of the opportunity given to us to
be an interested party in a case pending before
Constitutional Court and take a stand on issues that
the court is called upon to decide.

As one of the largest investors in Bulgaria, Shell
Bulgaria AD is a company that is interested in stability
of the legal order. This includes the stability of
the legal relations in which the private legal entities are parties
with entities that also have public law quality and exercise and
sovereign powers.

As in our request for our constitution as
interested party in the case is noted, the request is placed
issues whose resolution in a certain way the company is
interested. It is about the possibility through legislation
to influence legal relationships that have been established
on the basis of the current - at the time of their occurrence
legislation. In this regard, please note that
the case of 6 6 MANPADS is not unique. A similar provision is
also contains in the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Law on
municipal property (also 6 6).

We consider that the request made to
The Constitutional Court in the present case will act in this way
on the legislature that will lead to the removal of
the current legislation of all cases in which the state
has intervened by law in private law relations to the extent
which go beyond the constitutionally established and admissible
limits of state intervention.

In terms of> the constitutional foundations of
the economic system in the Republic of Bulgaria, which are contained in
the provision of Article 19 of the Constitution, we uphold
the opinion that the state and municipalities can have a private
property because of the opportunity open to them to perform
economic activity and to be participants in the civil turnover. When
the exercise of private property, however, all legal
entities, including the state and municipalities, are equal.
Art. 19, para 2 and 4 of the Constitution refer not only to the citizens and
legal entities, but also for the state and municipalities.

These are provisions adopted by the Constitutional Court in
evils or oiaaii
apply - in addition to all legal entities - to the bodies of
the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. It follows from them
moreover, after the existing legal order allowed in a given
moment granting the right to use real estate - private
state or municipal property, without period restrictions, for
which use is ceded is not permissible by law
change this term to be changed in relation to those that have already occurred
legal relations. The retroactive effect of law does not
complies with the rule of law enshrined in
the Bulgarian Constitution.

Please, when considering and resolving the above case, yes

take these considerations into account as well.
I.