Opinion of Judge Hristo Danov I consider that § 6 of the LSA contradicts the Constitution for the following reasons. According to Article 19, paragraph 1 of the Constitution the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria is based on free economic initiative. Paragraph 2 of the same text explicitly provides that the law guarantees equal rights and conditions for economic activity of all citizens and legal entities. Article 20a of the CPA stipulates that the contract concluded between two parties is a law for them. The state acts as an equal and equal partner with regard to the properties representing private state property. in the legal relationship in which she is a party. It follows that she in this capacity, entering into a certain legal relationship that binds her to a force equivalent to the law, can not unilaterally change the conditions under which they were formed. a contract, which is concluded for a definite term or is indefinite, contains planned actions, which are determined both by the term for which this contract p is concluded both for the purposes pursued by it. This means that it is not possible to request the termination of a contract of significant duration, which provides for investments involving huge costs. Termination of such a contract will be an unbearable burden both for the one who has made investments and for the state, if it will have to pay them. Such cases can be mentioned and this will be particularly contrary to Article 19, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. It should be borne in mind that many foreign investments have been made by establishing the right of use due to the explicit prohibition of Article 22, para 1 of the Constitution. Such investments made on the basis of long-term use contracts cannot be withdrawn and such withdrawal would be particularly contrary to the rule of law and investment protection. The considerations that the law provided for the establishment of a limited real right of use for a period of ten years and this required to equalize the rights of the state in relation to its real estate and, on the other hand, also the rights of citizens, does not tolerate any criticism.The law has effect for the future and therefore anyone who wants to enter into such legal relations and to establish in his favor the right of use, will know in the first place for how long he will be able to dispose of the property, whether it will have economic benefits for him and hence what investments he can afford to make. In short, he will know what the economic benefits of such a deal are. The confiscation of the property - the shortening of the term unilaterally - discredits the interests of the counterparty, who has trusted the law and order that existed at the time of the legal relationship. It will be placed in a very unfavorable position, which is inadmissible and which is obviously in significant contradiction with the provision of Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, as in practice the principle of the rule of law will be refuted in this case. The reference to the provision of Article 14 of the LNA on the possibility of creating legal norms with retroactive effect in this case is not justified by any of the considerations of the draft decision provided in the case. In its Decision № 17 of 1999 the Constitutional Court adopted in its reasons (ROX 1999, p. 186) the following: “… The principle of the rule of law contained in (Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution), among other things, means that the foundations of the rule of law laid down in The Constitution, apply equally to the bodies of the legislative, executive and judicial power, as well as to all other legal entities… ”In the same sense is Decision № 22 of 1996 (ROX 1996, p.230) and on the contrary argument Decision № 19 of 1993. The confiscation of the property by virtue of the provision of § 6 of the LSA does not provide for any compensation for shortening the term of use, payment of damages due to unilateral denunciation and termination of the contract and the value of improvements made in the property, nor is it indicated in what capacity and on what grounds they can be claimed. I cannot agree with the considerations made in the draft decision that such compensations were intended to be paid. In this case it is not a question of expropriation of the property, as discussed in the proposal made. Such expropriation could be done, but only within the framework of a law giving rights to it. The revocation of a created right through its unilateral termination cannot find any point of contact with the expropriation of property, especially since the property belongs to the state. In this case, she cannot alienate anything that belongs to her at all. In this case, the expropriation of properties for public needs is permissible only when this will be done for an event designated to create real estate public property. In this case, a right is taken away, which becomes unilateral and this, in my opinion, is inadmissible to happen. That is why I believe that the text of § ZDS is unconstitutional and should be declared as such.