DECISION № 8Sofia, 3 May 2001constitutional case № 10/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Rumen Yankov (Promulgated, SG No. 44 of 8 May 2001) Member State: Hristo Danov - President, Members: Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov - Rapporteur, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva By order of 19 April 2001 the Constitutional Court essentially the request of 61 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 7, para 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP); The request maintains that the mentioned texts introduced a barrier for both the active and the passive suffrage, depending on the property status of the citizens. These texts violated Art. 42 and Art. 11 in connection with Art. 6, para 2 and Art. 4, para. 2 and the preamble of the Constitution, taken in their interrelation. The interested parties Council of Ministers and the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee consider that the request is unfounded. Both opinions are based on the assertion that the obligation to pay the costs of printing the ballots is a guarantee that parties, coalitions and independent candidates have a responsible role in the conduct of the elections and their future possible participation in the government. The disputed norms applied equally to all participants in the elections and did not create unequal conditions and privileges for any of them. The opinion of the Civil Initiative for Free and Democratic Elections and the Bulgarian Association for Fair Elections and Civil Rights is contrary. According to them, the exercise of active and passive suffrage is regulated at the constitutional level and it must be guaranteed by the state. The opinions claim that in this case a kind of property qualification has been introduced in the exercise of the passive suffrage. In order to rule, the Constitutional Court took into account the following: According to Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Law on Elections, the expenses for election preparation to be at the expense of the state budget, with the exception of the costs for printing the ballot papers. The idea is further developed in Article 76 of the law. It shows that these costs are at the expense of parties, coalitions and independent candidates. There is an obligation within thirty-one days before the elections to pay to the account of the Council of Ministers the necessary amounts for printing the ballots. Insofar as no bank document for payment has been submitted, the registration of the party, the coalition and the independent candidate shall be annulled by the district election commission. which determined that the costs of organizational and technical preparation for the elections are borne by the state. The current law also abandons the system for subsidizing the election campaign of parties and coalitions. The provision of Article 10 of the Constitution states that elections are held on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The wording shows that there is an explicit obligation for the state, not the right to hold or not to hold elections in this way. In itself, the meaning of the word elections contains a requirement for pluralism - a plurality of participation of passive subjects of suffrage. From the analysis of the text further it follows that elections must be general. Indeed, the Constitution does not mention that elections should be free and fair. But there is little doubt that the last two requirements are intrinsic qualities of general elections. Fair representation is what most adequately represents public attitudes and political opinions in parliament. And this basic requirement could not be fulfilled if in one way or another passive or active suffrage is limited above the established norms. According to Article 11, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, political life in the Republic of Bulgaria is based on the principle of political pluralism. . Without going into this complex area, it should be noted that the main representatives of political pluralism are the parties and to a lesser extent the citizens and associations of a political nature. On the other hand, according to Article 11, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, the parties assist in forming and expressing the political will of the citizens. The forum for their realization is the current political life and mainly the parliamentary elections. From this point of view, the property status of the parties cannot be an obstacle to expressing the will of the citizens. We cannot talk about legal equality of party participation in the elections through the introduction of a common economic burden, which would hardly hinder some of them and would deprive others of participation in the election process. Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution has also been violated. For example, if there are no funds, the independent candidate will be deprived of the opportunity to participate in the elections. In this sense, there is essentially a restriction of equality before the law based on his property status. Indeed, there are "hopeless" political candidates. It is understandable that they will be hindered by the introduction of certain contributions, which in case of electoral failure will not be refunded. This is the practice mainly in the majority type of elections. However, this practice cannot have anything to do with the constitutional obligation of the state to hold general elections. Due to the above, the court held that the norms challenged by the MPs were unconstitutional - Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Law on Elections. of the ballots ”and art. 76, para 1 in the part“ and the party or the coalition pays the expenses for the production of the ballots with which it participates in the elections ”, art. 76, para 2 on the production of the ballots with which the candidates participate in the elections ”. It is necessary to establish the unconstitutionality in full of the other paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, which are in close connection and function of the first two. We are guided by the above and on the grounds of Art. , THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT DECIDES: Declares unconstitutional the following provisions of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (SG, issue 37 of 13 April 2001): Article 7, paragraph 2 regarding the words the ballot papers ”, as well as art. 76, para 1, sentence 1, para 2, sentence 1 and para 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.