JUDGMENT № 14Sofia, 30 May 2001constitutional case № 7/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Zhivan Belchev (Promulgated, SG No. 52 of 8 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev - Rapporteur, Penka Tomcheva of the unconstitutionality of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents of the former State Security (ZIDZDDBDS, promulgated, SG, issue 24 of 13.03.2001). The reasonable part of the request maintains the opinion that after the adoption of the law at first reading, a new bill was practically submitted to the committee, which differs in principle from the one adopted at the first vote. In fact, this is a new law, submitted not by MPs or by the Council of Ministers and it was adopted in one (second) vote. ZIDZDDBDS contradicts the provisions of Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 87, paragraph 1 and Article 88 , para 1 of the Constitution.2. According to the petitioners, the law contradicts the Constitution not only in terms of the legislative process, but also in terms of its content. They maintain that the principles of the rule of law, the separation of powers, the right to protect citizens against encroachment on their honor, dignity and With a ruling of March 29, 2001, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration on the merits and constituted as interested parties the National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Prosecutor General, the National Intelligence Service, the National Security Service, the Human Rights Committee, the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after 9 September 1944, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Bulgarian Media Coalition and the Union of Journalists in Bulgaria. The Constitutional Court opportunity, opinions on the request have been filed The Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Prosecutor General, the National Intelligence Service, the National Security Service - Ministry of Interior, the Human Rights Committee, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after 9 September 1944. Opinions of the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Director of the National Security Service - Ministry of Interior, the National Intelligence Service, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after September 9, 1944 maintain that ZIDZDDBDS does not contradict of specific norms of the Constitution. The Prosecutor General expresses an opinion that the Law on Public Procurement in general, as well as the impugned provisions individually do not contradict the Constitution with the exception of § 5 in its part regarding the provision of Article 3, paragraph 2, b. The Human Rights Committee considers that the request of the group of MPs is justified. The Constitutional Court, after discussing the arguments and written opinions of the interested parties set forth in the request, accepted the following: to the petitioners that the Law on Amendments and Supplements to the Law on Amendments and Supplements is completely unconstitutional, as in its essence it represents a new law and not a Law for amendment and supplement, and that it was adopted only on one (second) vote is unfounded.1. The bill for amendment and supplementation of the VAT Act was submitted to the National Assembly under № -054-01-122 by MP Metodi Borisov Andreev and a group of MPs on 30.11.2000 and the Speaker of the National Assembly by order distributed it to the two standing committees : The Committee on National Security and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Legislation against Corruption, the first of which is leading. The claim of the petitioners that a "mysterious", "apocryphal bill", drafted and submitted by an unknown person, was submitted to the National Assembly is obviously unfounded, ergo, contrary to Article 87, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.2. The Law for amendment and supplementation of the VAT Act does not contradict art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution. The position of the petitioners that the Act is contradictory to art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution is based on the statement that the law was adopted in violation of art. .11, para 1 of the Law on Normative Acts (LNA) and art. 68 and art. 69 of the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly (PODNS). The same is insolvent. It is notorious that the purpose of the LNA is the creation of rules for the drafting of the normative acts, which are important for the application and interpretation of the acts. The provision of art. 11, para 1 LNA is a legal, not a constitutional norm and its non-observance at the adoption of a law cannot be a ground for establishing the unconstitutionality. To accept the opposite means that any special law would be unconstitutional as adopted in contradiction with the constitutional principle of the rule of law. A conclusion in this sense follows from Decision № 5 of 12.03.1998 under c.d. № 2/98 (promulgated, SG, issue 30/98), by which the Constitutional Court has accepted that the “Assessment of constitutionality”, according to Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of The Constitution can be given only in view of whether constitutional provisions have been violated, and not other normative acts. ”The situation is identical with the provisions in PODNS. They also do not have the rank of a constitutional norm and their violation cannot justify the unconstitutionality of the law. In this sense is Decision № 3 of 3.04.1992 of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 30/91 (promulgated, SG No. 30/92) The fact that the PODNS is also subject to control for constitutionality shows that its non-observance cannot be equated with a violation of the Constitution. of the petitioners for violations of LNA and PODNS are unfounded. The provision of art. 11, para 1 LNA provides that repeal of a law and its replacement with a new one is allowed only when the amendments are numerous and significant. The legislator has provided for two cumulative requirements, which limit the cases of repeal of an existing law and its replacement with a new one. In this case, the petitioners base their claims only on the quantitative requirement, namely that the basic law - VATA, which is amended, has only 14 articles, located on 3 pages, while the draft of the AML / CFT originally submitted to the National Assembly had 22 paragraphs, located on 7 pages, and the adopted one was three times larger in volume than the originally submitted and was located on 17 pages. which has been amended and supplemented by the basic law is significantly larger in volume, as it contains numerous amendments, but it does not rearrange the matter in a new, essentially different way. It expands the scope of the current law, but essentially regulates the same public relations. The principles, the philosophy and the spirit of the basic law - ZDDBDS (promulgated, SG, issue 63 of 1997) have not been changed. The Law for amendment and supplement of ZDDBDS creates a more detailed regulation, compliant with the motives of Decision № 10 of 22.09. 1997 of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 14/1997 (promulgated, SG No. 89/97) regarding the bodies that carry out the inspection under the law, the place of the President and the Constitutional Court in the system of state bodies. It fully ensures the right to information of the society, as well as the obligation of the state to guarantee the dignity and rights of the individual. The Constitution does not limit the possibilities of the legislator to supplement or amend the draft laws between the two votes. In this sense, the provision of Article 68, paragraph 1 PODNS explicitly allows not only amendments but also additions to the bill adopted at the first vote, and the provision of Article 69, paragraph 3 PODNS places restrictions only on the discussion and voting of proposals that contradict the principles of the bill passed at the first vote. do not indicate which of the principles in the bill adopted at the first vote contradict the texts, supplemented and amended during the second vote. The draft of the AML / CFT Act was submitted by MPs In accordance with Article 87, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and it was adopted in two votes, as required by the provision of Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. Between the first and second reading, written proposals were received from 9 MPs for amendment and supplement the law. Other proposals were made at the meeting of the National Security Commission. After the debates of the committee in the plenary hall of the National Assembly, in the second reading of the law all proposals were put to the vote. have fulfilled their constitutional authority in the course of the legislative process between the two votes to amend the draft law on the Law on the Protection of Civil Procedure Rights without changing the principles and objectives of the law, it is obvious that the constitutional requirement of Article 88, paragraph 1 has not been violated. and adopted in two votes, held in two separate sessions. In view of the above considerations, the Constitutional Court considers that the adoption of the AML / CFT Act did not violate the provision of Article 11, paragraph 1 of the LNA and the provisions of Article 68 and Article 69 of the PODNS, and to make justified the request of the petitioners to declare the unconstitutionality of the whole law due to violation of the principle of On the request for declaring the unconstitutionality of § 6 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in its part, which amended Article 4 of the law and of § 7 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Freedoms of the Republic of Bulgaria, in its part new art. 4d of the lawAccording to art. 4, para 1 “The activity under art. 3, para 1, item 1, 3 and 4 shall be carried out by a permanent Commission for disclosure of documents and establishment of affiliation to the former State Security or the former Intelligence Department of the General Staff, hereinafter referred to as “the commission under Art. 4, para 1”. .4, para 1 consists of 7 members, appointed for a term of five years, as follows: five - elected by the National Assembly on the proposal of different parliamentary groups, and two - appointed by the Council of Ministers. According to the new provision of art. , para 1 of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (SDBS) and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, hereinafter referred to as “the commission under Art. 4d, para 1”. This commission consists of 5 members, including a chairman, for a term of 5 years, as follows: chairman appointed by the president of the Republic of Bulgaria, two members - judges of the Supreme Court of Cassation, appointed by the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation, and two members - prosecutors of the Supreme Cassation Prosecutor's Office, appointed by the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria. 117 et seq. and art. 153 of the Constitution are unfounded. The procedural commissions as state commissions from the point of view of the principles of the rule of law are independent. Guarantees for this are: 1. The way in which these commissions are formed; The representatives in these commissions are appointed by the highest state bodies, namely: the President, the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, as well as by the Chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General; 2. The composition of these commissions; It includes persons with high qualification and professional ethics and 3. Procedural guarantees against external interference, which include both the manner in which each of the commissions proceeds, as well as the materials on the basis of which the inspection is carried out.Regarding § 6 ZIDZDDBDS , with which a commission under Art. 4, para 1 has been established, the petitioners do not indicate which constitutional text or principle the disputed text contradicts. The provision of Art. 4 in its wording after the amendment with § 6 of the Amendments and Additions Act has been complied with. the interests of all political forces represented in parliament. Five members of this commission were elected by the National Assembly on the proposal of various parliamentary groups. In this situation, the representatives of the parliamentary opposition will have the same rights and access to information as the representatives of the parliamentary majority. In addition, the procedural commission is an independent body. It is not subject to the National Assembly or the Council of Ministers, which excludes any interference in decision-making. As for the commission under Art. 4d, para 1 of the law, it should be noted that in this part the provision of the law does not contradict Art. 8, Art. 117 et seq. And Art. 153 of the Constitution. According to Article 92, paragraph 1 and Article 93, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, the President embodies the unity of the nation and is directly elected. from the people. The President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General are appointed by the President on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council under the terms of Article 129 of the Constitution. It is obvious that the conditions for electing and dismissing these bodies ensure their independence and exclude the possibility of exercising them. By the way, the way of setting up this commission, which will make the final decision to disclose the information, creates guarantees for its objectivity and impartiality. The fact that two of the members of this commission are appointed by the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and two of the chief prosecutor in no way means that the provision of Article 4d, paragraph 1 of the law contradicts the principle of separation of powers, referred to in Article 8 of the Constitution. It does not contradict the norm of Article 153 of the Constitution. Neither the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation nor the Prosecutor General is empowered to add to the Constitution. Violation of the principle of separation of powers means in practice the seizure or reshuffling of constitutional functions between the various authorities. The Constitutional Court has had occasion to rule in connection with the separation of powers and the interaction between them. In this direction is Decision № 6 of 22.04.1993 under c.d. № 4/93 (promulgated, SG, issue 36/93). It states: “The legal and political content of the term“ separation of powers ”consists in the fact that the state power has three main spheres of manifestation, assigned to three main systems of bodies, which are relatively independent of each other and function in a certain interrelation. We are talking about the three main functions of state power, ie. differentiation of competence between the three groups of bodies, and not some triviality excluded in the governance of the modern state… The scientific explanation requires that account be taken of the fact that there is no "Chinese wall" between the various authorities, that they interact with each other and that ultimately are manifestations of unified state power and sovereignty. This is the idea enshrined in Article 8 of the Constitution. ”The procedural commission, despite the fact that magistrates are appointed in it, does not have the powers of a judicial body. It is also not a body of the executive branch. Its powers are control. The President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General do not appoint from their system other bodies of the executive power, ie. they do not appoint the commission as a collegial body of the executive power, but appoint separate representatives in it. In this case it is about interaction between the authorities, which according to the case law of the Constitutional Court is a manifestation of the unified state power and sovereignty. Moreover, appointments in these cases are made by bodies outside the judiciary, such as the President and the National Assembly. To accept the opposite, namely that the participation of magistrates in bodies outside the judiciary is unconstitutional, means that elections in which magistrates participated were held in violation of the Constitution. The Constitution does not contain provisions prohibiting the participation of magistrates in structures outside the judiciary. In the specific case they do not carry out judicial activity. The participation of magistrates in the commission under art. 4d, para 1 of the law, ie.The participation of members of the independent judiciary in this commission together with the President's representative creates guarantees for its impartiality, objectivity and independence. There is no obstacle for the President of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General to be assigned separate powers by special laws. The Constitution does not exhaustively regulate their powers. On the request for establishing the unconstitutionality of § 7 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, a new Article 4e has been created, according to paragraph 1 of which “the Minister of the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Director of the National Intelligence Service and the Director of the National Security Service set up working groups in the administrative units and services headed by them, which contain documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate assessment of the documents stored in the respective service, il and which have been handed over to them by natural and legal persons in accordance with Article 2. The claim of the petitioners that the working groups under Article 4e, paragraph 1, given that they are established by ministers and heads of other departments, representatives of the ruling political formation will carry out party orders, it is unfounded. It is logical and legally justified to create process working groups in the relevant departments, where the relevant information funds are stored. On the one hand, the persons included in these commissions are professionals in their field, and on the other hand, they are civil servants who, according to the provision of Article 4 of the Civil Servant Act, are politically neutral and are guided in the performance of their duties. In addition, it should be noted that the members of these working groups should give some assessment of specific official documents in relation to the circumstances to which they relate, explicitly stated in the law, and not to a free interpretation of these circumstances. The working groups perform only preparatory work, and the decisions are taken by the commission under Art. 4d, para 1. The Law for amendment and supplement of the VAT Act contains sufficient guarantees for the objectivity and impartiality of the bodies that will apply the law, including the procedural ones. working groups. In this direction is the provision of Art. 6d, created by § 11 of the Law on Public Procurement. Regarding the allegations that the Law on Public Procurement contradicts Article 4, paragraph 2, Article 32, paragraph 2, Article 38 and Article 56 of the Constitution, as and the principles set out in the preamble that the Basic Law protects citizens from discrediting, from damaging their name, honor and dignity. The Law amending the VAT Act complies with the reasons of Decision мо 10 of 22.09.1997 of the Constitutional Court under Art. .e. № 14/97 on the compliance of this law with the constitutionally guaranteed right of citizens to receive information and the constitutionally established obligation of the state to defend citizens from encroachment on their honor, dignity and good name. The right of citizens to receive information is a fundamental constitutional right , enshrined in Article 41, paragraph 1, assoc. 1 of the Constitution. A number of international acts, to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party, create obligations for protection of the right of access to information. Fundamental international legal instruments in this regard are: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of Europe and the Recommendations of Resolution 1096 of the Council of Europe. first session in 1946. The UN General Assembly unanimously adopted a Resolution on Freedom of Information, which reads: "The right to information is a fundamental human right and is a condition for all the freedoms to which the United Nations aspires." have worked in the special security bodies (DS, RU of the General Staff) of the totalitarian state, is an expression of the right of citizens and society to receive information. This right of citizens to receive information, enshrined in Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, cannot come into conflict with the constitutional restrictions of this right, explicitly written in Prov. 2 of Art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution. In the specific case ZIDZDDBDS, which is in compliance with the above-mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 14/97, regulates both the conditions and the order for disclosure of the information and besides creates guarantees for protection of the rights, provided in art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution, which in practice realizes the idea of ​​balance of interests. Strictly regulated rules have been established, which guarantee the independence of the bodies for conducting the respective inspection (the commissions are not in the structures of the legislative, executive or judicial power), which is a condition for impartiality and objectivity of the information. The constitutional right of the inspected persons to defend themselves against the incorrect decisions of the inspection bodies is guaranteed. In this way the danger of political and public discrediting is excluded, as well as the attempts to manipulate and blackmail individual citizens by distorting the facts. the above-cited decision of the Constitutional Court, in principle belonging to the former State Security does not affect the good name of the inspected persons. This is because a large part of the former State Security staff worked to protect the interests of the state. Many of them continue to cooperate with the current security services and the law protects them - Article 3, paragraph 2 of the Law on Security and Security of the Republic of Bulgaria. Nevertheless, the public has formed an opinion that such cooperation is reprehensible. However, the law does not create a collective presumption of reprehensibility of certain categories of activities, but creates conditions for establishing the specific activity of a certain person, namely whether he cooperated with the repressive authorities by transmitting information about dissidents, innocent people, contributing in this way to their political persecution by the repressive authorities, and ultimately whether this person benefited from this activity. The Constitutional Court considers that disclosing the names of Bulgarian citizens who cooperated with the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff does not harm their good name, honor and dignity, because with the activities they carried out as collaborators, they predetermined the fate of thousands of innocent people. Justice as another basic principle in law requires society to know who served the repressive authorities are accomplices in the persecution and repression of thousands of innocent people Depending on this, as indicated above, strictly regulated rules have been created in the AML / CFT Act, which guarantee impartiality and objectivity of the exported information. However, given that the disclosure of such information will affect a certain range of persons and will violate their constitutional rights, it is the duty of the legislator to ensure to the greatest extent the truthfulness and objectivity of the disclosed information. This direction is both the procedure for establishing the relevant facts of the case, as well as ensuring the right to defense. The establishment of affiliation to the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff is indisputable, provided in Article 5 in the wording of § 8 of the AML / CFT Act. According to Article 5a in the wording of § 9 of the AML / CFT the registration diary of the respective service, but for which documents under Art. 5, para 2 and 3 are missing. ”The statement is unfounded. One of the merits of the law is that it does not impose by law a certain moral conclusion, but aims to disclose sufficient data................................... in order for each citizen to be able to judge from the point of view of his morals and views, in each case whether the activity performed was worthy of respect or was reprehensible. In the stated considerations the Constitutional Court considers that the Act does not harm honor, dignity and goodness. name of the citizens, due to which it does not contradict art. 4, para 2 and art. 38 of the Constitution and the principles, indicated in the preamble of the Constitution. In this part the request is unfounded and should be left without respect. As for the statement of the petitioners about the contradiction of the law with the provision of art. 32, para 2 of the Constitution, the same is untenable. The Law for amendment and supplement of provides for monitoring, photographing, filming, recording of persons whose names will be disclosed under the terms and conditions provided therein, due to which the claim of the petitioners for contradiction of the law with Article 32, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is irrelevant to the dispute. is the request of the petitioners to establish the contradiction of the law with the provision of art. 56 of the Constitution, as the persons, whose names are included in the report under art. 3, para 1, item 3, have the protection provided in the law itself. is expressed in several directions: 1. As stated above, the establishment of affiliation with the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff is undisputed. In no case is it considered that the affiliation of individuals to the special services is established unquestionably on the basis of data alone. in the reference file or in the registration log of the respective service.2. The right to protection is exercised with the participation of the inspected person in the work of the commission under art. 4, para 1, thus he can frustrate the export of the information even before it is included in the report of the commission. According to art. 5 , para 3, item 6 in the wording of § 8 ZIDZDDBDS is provided in a certain hypothesis, when there is insufficient evidence, the person can be invited by the commission under art. 4, para 1 to get acquainted with the documents and data and to give a handwritten explanation.3. A form of protection is also the obligation of the standing committee to submit a report to the National Assembly on the activities performed by it in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 4 of the law. In this way parliamentary control over the activity of this commission is exercised.4. The inspected person may also defend himself against the disclosure of false data. According to the provision of Article 6d in the wording of § 11 of the law, “the persons whose names are included in the report under Article 3, paragraph 1, item 3 in contradiction with this law, may file against the commission under art. 4, para 1 a claim for compensation by the order of the Law for the responsibility of the state for damages, caused to citizens ”, which is in accordance with the requirement of art. 7 of the Constitution. to the petitioners that the term “beneficiaries” used in § 7, § 8, § 21 and others. of the Law on Public Procurement was so "stretchy" that it allowed for subjective assessment, which would discredit the persons subject to this assessment, is unfounded. In the provision of Article 5, paragraph 2, item 3 in its wording of § 8 of the Law listed the documents that should be taken into account when establishing the quality of a "beneficiary" within the meaning of this law. These persons, as well as all others, as indicated above, have judicial protection under Article 6d in the wording This provision does not contradict Article 4, paragraph 2 and Article 38 of the Constitution. The claim of the petitioners that with § 3, which amended Article 2, § 5, cannot be accepted as justified. , which amended Art. 3, para. 1, item 1 and § 8, which amended Art. 5, para. 2, item 1, item 2, item 3 of the Law on Public Procurement, arbitrary interpretations of the written evidence and thus a person appearing in any documents may be maligned despite the fact that there is no evidence of co-operation. The VAT Act exhaustively lists in detail the documents on the basis of which it should be established whether the person was a full-time employee, part-time employee or a beneficiary and these documents fully comply with the definitions given in § 1 of the additional provisions of the law. of § 21 of the AML / CFT Act. The legislator has even created an explicit protection of persons in respect of whom there is insufficient data to establish their affiliation to the former State Security or to the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff. This matter is regulated in the newly created provision of art. 5a in the wording of § 9 of the law. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of § 23 of the additional provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Freedoms of Children with Art. 6 of the Constitution According to the provision of art. 6, para 1 of the Constitution “All people are born free and equal in dignity and rights”. Paragraph 2 of the same article states that “all people are equal before the law. No restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political affiliation, personal and social status or property status are allowed. ”It is not clear from the applicants' considerations. which of the constitutional grounds listed in the text of Art. 6 contradicts the provision of § 23 of the Law on Public Procurement? § 2a has been created with the provisions of § 23 of the additional provisions of the Law on Public Procurement, which regulates the two hypotheses: 1, and of “public activity” - para 1, item 2. With the second paragraph of § 2a the legislator has accepted, “that the performance of activity as a full-time or part-time associate of an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service is incompatible with the occupation of public office within the meaning of para 1, item 1 ”. If it is assumed that the allegations of the petitioners are aimed at establishing the unconstitutionality of § 2a, para 2 of the additional provisions of the law, the Constitutional t court considers that they are unfounded.1. The legislator has in mind the incompatibility of the public position held by the persons under para 1 of § 2a and the performance of activity as a full-time or part-time associate of an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service, so it cannot be argued that the persons under para 1 of § 2a, holding a “public office”, are limited in their choice to work as a full-time or part-time employee in the relevant security services. And this is because each person holding the relevant “public office” must decide for himself whether to continue to perform This position does not in any way limit the rights under Article 6 of the Constitution of persons holding a “public office” in the state, because this is not the only case of legislative incompatibility of activities. In this sense are the provisions of Article 132 of the Judiciary Act, Article 7 of the Civil Servant Act and Article 41 of the Local Self-Government Act. To accept the opposite, it follows that all these texts of the three laws are unconstitutional. Obviously, this case also concerns legislative expediency.2. The argument that the provision of § 2a, para 2, created by § 23 of the Law on Public Procurement, does not contradict Art. 6 of the Constitution can be sought in the very incompatibility between the activity that the persons as public figures in the hypothesis of § 2, para 1, item 1 of the law carry out and the activity that they could perform as collaborators of the special security services. It is vitally and legally unreasonable for the persons who perform the public positions referred to in § 2a, para 1, item 1 to perform activities as collaborators of the special security services, moreover, that in all cases the work in these services is strictly Confidential. In the case of dependence, which in any case arises in view of the nature of work in special security services, public figures could hardly fulfill their constitutional and legal obligations for the public positions they hold. Regarding the allegations of contradiction of § 5, with which has been amended Art. 3 in its part of para 1, item 2 of the Amendments and Supplements Act with a preamble, Art. 1 and Art. 9 of the ConstitutionAccording to paragraph 4 of the preamble of the Constitution the Constitutional Legislator is The provision of Article 9 of the Constitution raises the duty of the armed forces to guarantee the sovereignty, security and independence of the country and to protect its territorial integrity. The allegations of the petitioners that the disclosure of the names на Bulgarian citizens who were full - time or part - time collaborators of the former State Security or of the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, or beneficiaries of the former State Security, or of the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff within the meaning of Article 3, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Law on State Security directly affects the national security of the state and thus contradicts of the preamble and Article 9 of the Constitution is unfounded.1. The Law for amendment and supplement of the VAT Act does not deny the continuity in the specialized services.2. The law creates sufficient guarantees for the protection of national security. In this direction are the provisions of art. 3, para 2, item 1 and item 2 and para. 4 of the law in the wording after their amendment with § 5 of the Act, as well as the provisions of art. 4e, para 3, item 1 and para 4, and art. 4g after their creation with § 7 of the Act. regulations do not disclose the names of persons who were full-time or part-time collaborators of the former State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, but who still perform relevant activities in the intelligence and counterintelligence of the state.3. The petitioners' argument that the disclosure of the "files" will discredit many Bulgarian and foreign citizens, former collaborators of our intelligence and counterintelligence services and this will lead to many lawsuits against the Republic of Bulgaria in the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg is untenable, as there is no request on the part of the petitioners under Art. 149, para 1, item 4 of the Constitution, namely that the AML / CFT Act does not comply with generally recognized norms of international law and international treaties to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party. concerns the specifically raised assertion that § 5, which amended Art. 3 in the part of para 1, item 2 of the law contradicts Art. 1 of the Constitution, the same is untenable. The mentioned provision does not have as its subject the constitutional form of government of our state, as well as the basic principles on which state power is built, due to which the claim of the petitioners for its contradiction with Article 1 of the Constitution is irrelevant to the dispute. here are the petitioners for contradiction of the provision of art. 3, para 2, b. “F” in the wording of § 5 of the Law on Criminal Procedure in the part “or against him there is or has been subsequently initiated and terminated preliminary proceedings for such a crime” According to the provision of Article 31, paragraph 3 of the Constitution the accused is presumed innocent until Indeed, the provision of Art. 3, para. 2, item “e” in the wording of § 5 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights does not provide as a consequence that the persons against whom there is or has been initiated and subsequently initiated preliminary proceedings for a serious crime under the Criminal Code, should be considered guilty or convicted of the crime for which preliminary proceedings were instituted against them and the same was terminated. But to put these persons in the same category with persons convicted of a serious crime under the Penal Code, and to suffer the legal consequences of such a conviction, namely to disclose their names as full-time and part-time collaborators of the State Security or the former Intelligence Directorate of Gen. The General Staff, although they were collaborators of the respective intelligence or counterintelligence services, it is obvious that in this part the attacked provision contradicts the norm of art. 31, para 3 of the Constitution. The procedural provision also contradicts the norm of art. 117, para .2 of the Constitution, as it calls into question the legality and fairness of the respective acts for termination of the criminal proceedings, issued by the independent judiciary. In these judgments the Constitutional Court considers that on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of The Constitution should establish the unconstitutionality of Article 3, paragraph 2, item “e” in the wording of § 5 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the attacked part. From the above it is clear that with regard to all other texts specifically are the subject of the written request, as well as the others, which the court ex officio checked, the request of the group of MPs as unfounded should be rejected. and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Declares unconstitutional the provision of § 5 of the Law on Public Procurement Act (promulgated, SG, issue 24 of 13.03.2001), which amends Article 3 of the VAT Act in the part of para 2, b. "F" regarding the text "or there is or has been initiated and subsequently initiated preliminary proceedings for such a crime". Rejects the request of 54 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of all other provisions of the Act.