OPINION
from
lawyer Mikhail Ekimdzhiev
Plovdiv, 021 Otets Paisiy Str., Tel / fax: 032 26 4097,
Plenipotentiary of the Association for European Integration and Human Rights -
Plovdiv

1. PROCEDURE.

By Order of the Constitutional Court of 3 May 2001. “Association for
European integration and human rights ”was constituted as a stakeholder
party to the constitutional case He 12/2001.

The case was initiated at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria
for declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para 1 of the Law for election of
MPs / ZINP !, according to which:

"During the election campaign, the registered candidates for
MPs and advocates may not be detained and
brought to criminal responsibility, except in the cases of severe cases
a crime ”.

P. LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE REQUEST TO THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION.

The main legal arguments of the Prosecutor General of the Republic
can be summarized as follows:

2.1. At the formal legal level it is argued that criminal law
immunity, as a specific exception to the constitutional principle of equality
of citizens before the law, can be provided only in
The Constitution. In support of this opinion, the provisions of Article 69 are indicated,
70,147,132 of the Constitution, regulating the abolition of criminal
responsibility and inviolability of certain categories of persons - people
representatives, judges, prosecutors, investigators.

Based on these examples, the thesis is argued that it is not possible by law
creates immunity for persons other than those exhaustively specified in the Constitution.

2.2. In substantive terms, the Prosecutor General claims that the provision
of Article 53, paragraph | of the ZINP contradicts the constitutional principle of equality of

citizens, objectified in the provision of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, according to
which:

“Fri. 6 (2) All citizens are equal before the law. None are allowed
restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political
affiliation, personal and social status or property status. "

In support of that view, the applicant refers to the provisions of
127, item 1 and art. 31, para 1 of the Constitution, according to which:

Art. 127 The Prosecutor's Office monitors the observance of the law by:
1. bring to justice the persons who have committed
crimes, and upholds the charge in criminal cases of a general nature;

Art. 31, para 1 Everyone accused of a crime should be handed over to
the judiciary within the legally prescribed period.

The Prosecutor General also claims that the challenged provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of Art
ZINP ”can seriously impede the prosecution of
perpetrators of crimes, including serious crimes ”.

W. LEGAL ANALYSIS

3.1. For the correct definition of the subject and the constitutional aspects of
the problem under consideration, I consider it appropriate to adopt "a rio!" the fiction that
the request of the Prosecutor General is well-founded and art. 53, para | from ZINP is
unconstitutional. In practice, this would mean that within 29-
the daily term of the election campaign, the bodies of the Police, the Investigation and
The prosecution could take repressive measures / arrest,
formation of a preliminary investigation, detention / against everyone
candidate for MP and thus de Vasco to predetermine
the failure of his candidacy.

In this context, the Prosecutor General's request configured two
fundamental constitutional principles of the rule of law - the principle of.
equality of citizens before the law / art. 6, para 2 / and the principle of division of
the authorities / art. 8, para 1 /.

In this respect, the task of the Constitutional Court in the present case is to.
find the optimal, from the point of view of law and public interest, balance in
the outlined competition of basic constitutional principles.

In my opinion, the appropriate starting position in the search for this balance is
the provision of art. |, para. | of the Constitution, according to which “Bulgaria is a republic with
parliamentary government ”The constitutionally established supremacy of
Parliament assumes the highest degree of reliability of the normative
guarantees, both for independence in its operation and for the conditions of.
its formation.

From this point of view, the one regulated in Art. 53, para! from ZINP immunity of
candidates for MPs can be considered as one

Art. 5 of the PPC “Against persons who enjoy immunity with respect to
of the criminal jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria, the procedural actions,
provided for in this Code may be carried out only in accordance with the rules
of international law. "

Therefore, at the formal legal level, the fact that the immunity of
candidates for MPs was introduced by law without having a corresponding
constitutional text does not lead to unconstitutionality of the provision of
Article 53, para. from ZINP.

3.3. The opinion of the Prosecutor General that
the provision of art. 53, para. of the Law on Public Procurement contradicts Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution,
according to which:

"All citizens are equal before the law. None are allowed
restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political
affiliation, personal and social status or property status. "

This is because in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law they are exhaustively indicated
social characteristics excluding restrictions on the rights or granting of
privileges / The Constitutional Court has expressed its unequivocal opinion on
this issue in Decision He 14 of 10.11.1992. on constitutional case He 14/92 / V
the same decision the CC held that in terms of features and criteria that are not.
exhaustively listed in Article 6, paragraph 2, the Constitution allows certain restrictions
rights and granting privileges to certain social groups. In all
these cases, according to the Constitutional Court, are socially necessary and social
justified privileges, while maintaining the primacy of the principle of equality of arms
all citizens before the law.

I consider that this view, by analogy, can be reproduced in
the present case. In the case under consideration, the quality “candidate for the people
representative ”does not correspond to any of the limited ones listed in art. 6, para 2
social criteria in respect of which the Constitution excludes any
form of inequality. On the other hand, as stated above,
the provision of art. 53 para. of the ZINP introduces a short - term privilege for
a narrow circle of persons who serve the public “interest and the defensible
constitutional principles.

3.4. I consider that the art. 127, item | and Article 31, paragraph 1
of the Constitution have no direct bearing on the issue under consideration.

3.4.А. The first of these provisions guarantees
bringing to justice “the perpetrators
crimes ”.

Because, according to Article 54 of the Law on Public Procurement, the election campaign continues
exactly 29 days, it could hardly be assumed that the impossibility of a candidate for
a Member of Parliament to be detained or prosecuted
it was during this period that the criminal repression would be thwarted.

socially acceptable exception to the principle of equality of citizens before
of the law.

In support of this view, I put forward the following arguments:

Possible dropping of the one guaranteed by the Law> criminal
the inviolability of candidates would jeopardize:

A / The possibility, in case of possible loss of immunity, the organs
the police and the judiciary to take compromising actions
candidates for MPs, with able to defile the electoral vote.
This would actually jeopardize the selective guaranteed in Article 42 of the Constitution
right.

B / The principle of separation of powers / art. 8 para 1 /

The ability for the executive and the judiciary to manipulate
the election campaign and to influence the composition of the future parliament, in case
the waiver of the immunity of the candidates for MPs would inevitably
led to a disturbance of the balance between the authorities to the detriment of the legislature.

C / The possibility to distort the principles of formation of
Parliament, and through them the independence of the National Assembly, as supreme
legislative body, creates a real danger of distorting the principle of
the people's sovereignty referred to in Art. para 2 of the Constitution, according to which “The whole
state power comes from the people ”.

The violation of these fundamental constitutional principles is in
able to discredit the very essence of the "rule of law" and
parliamentarism as a form of government.

Against the background of these very real dangers for the post-totalitarian state,
far more acceptable, from the point of view of the public interest, it seems
granting a short-term / 29 days / privilege to an insignificant, c
statistical plan, number of persons nominated for MPs.

Based on these considerations, I consider that, in general, the provision of.
Article 53, paragraph | of the ZINP is a justified, admissible and even necessary, from the point of view
point of law, the public interest and the Constitution itself, with the exception of
the principle of equality of citizens before the law.

The following arguments against the request of
The Chief Prosecutor:

3.2. The claim of the petitioner that criminal is not convincing
immunity cannot be introduced by law. It is not such a constitutional principle
objectified declaratively in the provisions of the Constitution, nor can it be
deduced categorically from the norms of the current Bulgarian legislation.
Sufficiently convincing in this regard is the fact that Article 5 of the Penal Code and Art.
although by reference to the norms of international law, regulate
immunity of certain categories of foreign nationals.

Art. 3, para! of the Penal Code “The Penal Code applies to all
crimes committed on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria.

para 2 The issue of the responsibility of foreigners who use
immunity in respect of the criminal jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria
decides in accordance with the norms of international law adopted by it. "

 

3.4.B. According to Art. 31, para. from
The Constitution:

"Everyone accused of a crime should be brought to justice
authority within the legally prescribed period. ”

This text is definitely irrelevant to the content of Article 53, paragraph from
ZINP, as it is its provision that makes the categories incompatible
"Accused of a crime" and "candidate for MP". Obviously
the constitutional text means "anyone" who by virtue of the act
right, can be charged with a crime, not "everyone", even when the law
forbids this.

3.5. A certain concern in terms of human rights is the statement of
the submitter of the request that the provision of art. 53, para. from ZINP ”can seriously
hinder the prosecution of perpetrators of crimes, in this
number of serious crimes ”According to Article 31, paragraph 3 of the Constitution
"The accused shall be presumed innocent until the contrary is established by an entry into force
sentence ”. Therefore, "perpetrators of crimes", within the meaning of
The Constitution are only persons who have already been convicted. Obviously the criminal
persecution against them cannot be difficult, as it is over
with an effective sentence.

The concern from the quoted opinion comes not so much from the legal one
its paradoxicality, as much as the readiness expressed in it by the candidates for the people
representatives, and rpop! to be qualified as potential criminals.

I believe that this is the "argument" of the Prosecutor General of the Republic
Bulgaria, in itself, proves that in the conditions of the post-totalitarian state it does not
there are unnecessary additional guarantees for the rule of law and the People's Law
assembly as a legislative body.

In the above context, I consider that the request of the Prosecutor General for
declaring the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para of ZINP should be
rejected as regards the criminal integrity of the candidates for
MPs and could only be respected in respect of
immunity of their advocates.

Arguments for the public necessity and justification of the privileges
of the candidates could not be defended with the same persuasiveness
in respect of advocates. Therefore, with regard to their immunity, c
in accordance with the request of the Prosecutor General, priority should be given to
the constitutional principle of equality of citizens before the law. By
In the case of advocates, this principle is not so directly confronted with
the supremacy of Parliament, popular sovereignty, the separation of powers, and
freedom of suffrage.

TU.CONCLUSION.

Based on the above, I consider that the Constitutional Court of the Republic
Bulgaria could declare unconstitutional the provision of Article 53, para. 1

of the ZINP only regarding the words “and the advocates”, and the rest of the request of
The Attorney General should be dismissed.