Special opinion of judges Todor Todorov, Rumen Yankov and Penka Tomcheva

The relationship between the judiciary and other authorities must be assessed on the basis of several factors:

a) Independence in decision making. Legislatively, when creating a constitution or law, the relevant authority may be independent of the others and yet not be able to perform its functions independently if the final decision depends on conditions related to the other authorities to such an extent that in fact a restrictive balance not to get.

b) Organizational independence, including mainly on personnel issues.

c) Compliance with the principle of separation of powers, the purpose of each of them is to function in a certain area in the constitutional mandatory interaction in the exercise of state power - Article 1, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. By the way, the term "separation of powers" in itself creates resistance, because on such a basis hardly any state system could function. On the other hand, it is well known that in a certain area, if any authority is allowed to act uncontrollably, it will become a source of despotism. The master's degree is no exception. Here the danger is heightened, as historically the judiciary has been less dependent on other authorities for law enforcement and is virtually beyond civil control. Socially and psychologically, "the power of judges is tolerable only because of the possibility of appeal." In this situation, there is a great danger of forming an isolated government, which, under claims of independence, opposes any change, demand for responsibility and transparency.

d) In methodological terms, it should be explicitly noted that the issues not settled by the Constitution are left to the discretion of the National Assembly. Where the Constitution does not introduce explicit prohibitions, the legislator is free, within the framework of the general constitutional principles, to regulate the respective matter by legislative order. This is especially true for the so-called. organizational laws regulating the organization and functioning of the state apparatus, including in the sphere of the judiciary (Article 133 of the Constitution).

We believe that the assessment of constitutionality should be made from those starting points, which are not taken into account in the decision.

1. Under paragraph 1, item 2, which amends Art. 20, para 3 JSA

The provision is a reminiscence of the decision of the Constitutional Court under c.d. № 10/99, which recognized the election of two members of the SJC as illegitimate. Then the personnel activity of the council for a period of two years ago was questioned.

On the occasion of the composition of the SJC with a decision under c.d. № 9/94 it was accepted that Article 133 of the Constitution refers to the law on the regulation of the organization of the SJC. In this regard, the Constitutional Court has adopted the thesis that the requirements for the election of members of the council are included in its organization. The SJC is a collective body of the judiciary. The election and dismissal of members of the council are an element of its organization, as stated in the decision, and this must be done by law.

Here the legislator has applied the rule that no one can be a judge for himself ( nemo judex in sua causa ). The rule is, in essence, a reasonable and proportionate restriction on the right to vote in order to exclude possible interest. In this direction are also the provisions of art. 25, para 2 of ZKS and art. 31 of JSA.  

Therefore, the disputed provision is not unconstitutional.

2. Under § 3, item 1, letter “a”, which amends Art. 27, para 1, item 3 JSA regarding the expression “bailiffs, entry judges and court employees”

The newly created text takes into account the specifics of these positions and their inseparable connection with the judiciary.

As an example, it can be pointed out that where there are no appointed bailiffs, their position is performed by the district judge - Article 142, paragraph 2 of the JSA. The funds for their remuneration are included in the budget of the judiciary, which in turn is determined by the annual Budget Law. The provision aims to achieve a balance between the number of magistrates and the persons who carry out activities in direct connection with the magistracy and nothing more. Otherwise, the law states that the Minister of Justice appoints the executive judges - Article 150, paragraph 2 and the entry judges - Article 160, and the respective head of the judiciary - the court employees.

It is not unconstitutional for the SJC, as the primary administrator of the budget, to determine the number of executive judges, registry judges and administrative employees, after determining the amount of their remuneration.

3. Under § 3, item 1, letter “b”, which supplements Art. 27, para 1, item 6 of the JSA - 1/5 of the members of the SJC to request the lifting of the immunity and for temporary removal from position of judge, prosecutor and investigator in the manner prescribed by law. 

The declaration of the provision as unconstitutional in the decision is based on Article 127, item 1 of the Constitution, according to which only the prosecution has an accusatory function.

Immunity is established in the public interest. Removing it is not part of the prosecution, but a condition that makes it possible. It is a prerequisite for criminal proceedings and is not its beginning. That is why it is removed by bodies that are not provided for in the criminal procedure - the National Assembly, the Constitutional Court, the SJC. More on c.d. № 13/92 it was accepted that in the Constitution there is a difference between immunity and the beginning of criminal proceedings.

There is no position in the system of government and administration to which immunity cannot be waived. The formal reading of the Constitution, without distinguishing between immunity and criminal responsibility, leads to the logical and constitutional absurdity that the Grand National Assembly within the state has appointed a person to whom it has granted the right to hold anyone accountable without rules. for herself in this direction. In the rule of law, in its relationship with persons representing state power, no distinction can be made. According to the basic principles of the Constitution - Article 6, paragraph 2, all citizens are equal before the law, and in addition, according to Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law.

By the way, the Constitution itself with Article 132, paragraph 2 does not make a difference in the hierarchy in lifting the immunity of a judge, prosecutor or investigator from the SJC. This provision of Article 27, paragraph 1 ultimately synchronizes the hypothesis of Article 29, paragraph 1, item 4 of the JSA, according to which there is a possibility for the heads of the three units of the judiciary to be released upon entry into force of a sentence. for a crime of a general nature.

4. Paragraph 3, item 1, item “d”, by which item 10, art. 27 JSA has been created in the part regarding the expression “summarized by the Minister of Justice”

The summarization of the case law by the Minister on the basis of the reports of the heads of the three units of the judiciary is an ex post facto activity. This activity cannot affect the activity of the judiciary, ie. of their independence.

The Constitution explicitly creates opportunities for mutual control and ensuring balance in the functioning of the three authorities.

The request from the judiciary to be declared an unconstitutional law, the findings of an existing danger of a crime, the annulment of a ministerial decree are examples in this regard. And no one in these cases claims that the prestige and independence of the legislature or the executive are affected.

The prestige of a judiciary cannot be built on the prohibition on informing other authorities and the public about its activities.

5. Paragraph 3, item 1, b. "D" in the part in which a new item 14 of art. 27, para 1 of JSA is created

It is said that the SJC must approve the rules for professional ethics of professional organizations of judicial officers.

There is no need to justify the nature of the rules of professional ethics. The presence and need for them are imposed by practice. That is why the moral criteria have to be determined by individual professional classes, whose limited circle of members excludes the application of normative acts with a wide range of addressees.

Ultimately, a code of ethics is necessary because moral categories are constantly changing and therefore not subject to legal regulation. This is the reason why the drafting of codes of ethics is generally left to professional organizations. Insofar as the SJC, as the supreme administrative body of the judiciary, represents all its units, it is logical and expedient for its act to establish codes of ethics.

The Constitution does not prohibit such regulation.

6. Paragraph 4, item 1, which amends Article 28 of the JSA

It is about the plenums of the Supreme Courts, the Prosecutor General's Office and the general assemblies of judges, prosecutors and investigators to nominate their administrative heads by secret ballot, which proposal should be sent to the SJC.

Article 133 of the Constitution explicitly provides for the possibility to regulate by law the rules for the work of the SJC. In particular, the law now for the first time regulates the rules for administrative heads to be nominated at general meetings of magistrates. Since the personnel powers of the heads of the units are not specified in the Constitution, but by law, on what grounds should the magistrates be denied the right by secret ballot to elect heads to propose to the SJC for election along with the reserved independent power of the heads of units and the Minister of Justice.

But it should be emphasized here that the new rules have a direct bearing on the independence of magistrates. The combination of administrative and instance control is detrimental to the master's degree. There is a danger that the sole leader will advance politically pleasing and legally obedient magistrates from lower instances. What independent decisions can be expected from a magistrate, whose career and hence remuneration depends solely on the administrative head.

7. Paragraph 6 in the part of Art. 30, para.

First of all, it should be noted that what is said under item 2 of this dissenting opinion applies to the powers of the SJC regarding the determination of the number of bailiffs, registry judges and court employees.

There is nothing unconstitutional in the fact that the proposals under Art. 30, para 1 JSA should be made through the Minister of Justice, who by law is obliged to send them to the SJC within 7 days.

As can be seen, the provision obliges the Minister of Justice to carry out the action prescribed by him within a period determined by law. This excludes the possibility for him to exercise any discretion and to influence the independence of the SJC. It is not necessary to further clarify that the activity related to the organization of the meetings of the SJC is not a power - a term that every lawyer associates with a decisive function.

But something else is important here. Whether the balance between the authorities is disturbed must be judged from the content of the whole law. Thus, Article 26, paragraph 7 of the JSA provides for the possibility of changes in the agenda of the meeting by each member of the SJC, regardless of the disputed authority of the Minister.

8. Paragraph 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 1, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “based on a proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 3, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meetings of the prosecutors of the respective prosecutor's offices”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 7, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meeting of the respective court”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 9, b. “A” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general assembly of the district court”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 1, item 10, b. “B” JSA regarding the words “upon proposal of the general meeting of the investigators from the district investigation services”; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 2 JSA regarding participation of magistrates from the units of the judiciary, whose composition is less than 5 people, to participate with the right to vote from the general assemblies of the higher bodies of the judiciary; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 3 JSA , determining the manner of taking decisions by the general assemblies of the magistrates; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 4 JSA , obliging the respective head to submit the proposal of the general assembly to the SJC through the Minister of Justice; § 6 in the part of art. 30, para 5 JSA regarding the words “of the general meeting and”.                 

The issues under the paragraphs listed in item 8 are general and what has been said about the admissibility from the constitutional point of view of the magistrates to make proposals for the election of their leaders by the SJC will apply to it.

9. Paragraph 6 in the part of art. 30, para 8 JSA

The provision states that in execution of the personnel decisions of the SJC under Art. 27, para 1, item 4 orders are issued by the “chairperson of the SJC”.

First of all, it should be noted that the "chairman" in this case should mean not only the Minister of Justice, but also the other three heads of the judiciary.

Secondly, that who presides is obliged to issue an order. He has no discretion and cannot sign any act other than that of the SJC. We consider it excessive to assume that after the decision of the SJC to appoint a senior magistrate, to sign an order by the one who chairs the meeting, the principle of separation of powers is violated. For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that even under the current regime, which is preserved by repealing the norm, orders are issued by the Minister of Justice under item 1, b. "B", items 6 and 7 of art. 30, para 4 in its wording from 1998.

10. Paragraph 9 in the part of art. 35a, para 1 JSA

The provision stipulates that the Minister of Justice, on the basis of annual reports submitted by the units, shall prepare a summary report on the activities of the judiciary and submit it to the SJC for consideration. This provision is not unconstitutional and the considerations for this are set out in item 4 of this dissenting opinion.

11. Paragraph 9 in the part of art. 35b JSA

The provision before the amendment of the law was the subject of a request to be declared unconstitutional under c.d. № 34/98, which was rejected.

It is necessary to reproduce the decisive paragraph of the reasons: "The inspection of the organization of the formation and movement of judicial, prosecutorial, investigative cases by the Minister cannot be considered as interference of the executive power in the work of the judiciary."

A comparison of Article 35b with the old text shows that the name "Ministry of Justice" has been replaced by "Minister of Justice". In the new para 3 of art. 35b it is provided for a judge, prosecutor and investigator to participate in the joint inspections together with representatives of the inspectorate. Without new circumstances or arguments, the Constitutional Court should not deviate from the cited decision.

In this particular case, it should be noted that the Constitution does not exclude the right of the legislator to provide for the possibility of extending the inspections related only to the organization of judicial activity to the Supreme Courts and the Prosecutor General's Office.

12. Paragraph 9 in the part of art. 35e JSA

Judicial experts are not magistrates. Their conclusions are not judicial acts and are not binding on the courts and prosecutors' offices.

From this point of view, the broad interpretation of Article 133 of the Constitution, according to which the organization and activity of courts, prosecutors and investigative bodies must be regulated by law, is exaggerated. Even if it is assumed that the activity of forensic experts can be regulated by law, this does not exclude the general rule according to which the legislator may delegate this regulation to the Council of Ministers. In fact, such a legal delegation is contained in the contested provision.

13. Paragraph 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 1 JSA regarding the words “bailiffs and entry judges”

It is said that the general assembly of the district court consists of all judges and entry judges.

The provision is not unconstitutional.

Judicial enforcement achieves the ultimate goal of exercising citizens' rights. The connection between the claim process and the enforcement process is obvious. In the instance plan, the actions of the bailiffs are controlled by the district judges. In terms of budget, their payment is provided by the budget of the district court.

14. Paragraph 12 in the part of art. 56a, para 2, item 1 JSA

The provision concerns the general assembly of the district court, which consists of all judges, bailiffs and entry judges.

For the reasons stated above, this composition of the general assembly of the district court is not unconstitutional.

It should be borne in mind that the power of a general assembly to nominate a chairman of the court provided for in Article 56a, paragraph 2, item 1 of the JSA would be unconstitutional if the bailiffs and the entry judges participate in it. However, this unconstitutionality cannot be extended to the other powers regulated in this paragraph, due to which the decision of the court in this part is incorrect.

15. Paragraph 13, which amends and supplements Article 59 of the JSA

It is about the new para 3, item 1 - the general assembly of the district court to appoint a person, who proposes for chairman, and para 4, which determines the quorum of the general assembly for taking this decision; § 14, item 2 in the part of art. 63, para 1, item 3, letter “b”, obliging the chairman of the district court to send a reference according to a sample prepared by the SJC to the Minister to submit it to the SJC ; § 15, which amends Art. 62, para 2 JSA , the content of which is in the sense that the General Assembly of the military court exercises the powers under Art. 59, para 3, items 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6. ; § 16, which amends and supplements Article 76 of the JSA . It is about the activity of an appellate court. The General Assembly to exercise the powers under Art. 59, para 3, items 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6, of which item 1 refers to a decision of the General Assembly to propose a chairman of the court; § 17, item 2 in the part of art. 79, para 1, item 2, letters “a” and “b” JSA regarding the words “ of the Minister of Justice” and letter “b” regarding the annual report on the activity of the court and sending inquiries and statistics to the Minister of Justice for consideration by the SJC; § 23, which with Art. 100, para 1 JSA creates a new item 6, regarding the words “Minister of Justice” . This refers to the report of the SAC, which is sent to the Minister of Justice for inclusion in the report under Article 27, paragraph 1, item 10 (annual report of the courts by the Minister of Justice); § 27, which amends Article 114, paragraph 6 of the JSA , regarding the words “Minister of Justice” . This is an obligation of the Prosecutor General to send the annual report to the Minister of Justice for inclusion in the summary report under Article 27, paragraph 1, item 10. In all the above cases, the legislator is constitutionally authorized to create a legal framework for the organization of the activity of the judiciary. The same arguments as set out above regarding the powers of general meetings of magistrates and the summarizing of reports and the preparation of statistical reports apply here.                  

16. Paragraphs 35 and 36, which amend Art. 125 and create Art. 125a JSA

Distinguishing magistrate positions in the judiciary from the capacity of administrative head is not unconstitutional.

The positions in the judiciary listed in the Constitution are judge, prosecutor, investigator, chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation, chairman of the Supreme Administrative Court and chief prosecutor. Positions such as chairman of a district, district or appellate court, district, district or appellate prosecutor, director of the NSS and director of a district investigation service, as well as the positions of their deputies are not specified in the Constitution and are established by law. The comparison of para 2 and para 3 of art. 129 gives grounds to conclude that the Constitution distinguishes between a magistrate position and a position of administrative head, although only for the chairmen of the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court and the Prosecutor General. The mandate relates only to the capacity of administrative head, but not to the capacity of magistrate. According to the Constitution, there is no obstacle in the JSA to differentiate the position of the magistrate from the capacity of administrative head. The irremovability of the magistrate under Art. 129, para 3 shall not include irremovability of the managerial position held by him. It is intended to safeguard the independence of his business, not to preserve his leadership. When a court president loses this capacity, he continues to be a judge, and that is crucial. The constitution defends the status of a judge, not a leader. And it is inadmissible to believe that she is defending the managerial quality that has been acquired.

The mandate under the Constitution, provided for the heads of the units, may be changed by law. There is no constitutional obstacle to the introduction by law of a mandate for positions not provided for in the Constitution. In Decision № 33/98, the Constitutional Court concluded that there was no constitutional provision that would exclude the possibility of a mandate for bodies other than those specified in the Constitution. If there is no ban, there can be no talk of violating it. This means that in other cases the National Assembly can provide a mandate by law.

From this point of view, it cannot be assumed that the amendments violate Article 129, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The law does not affect the magistrates in this capacity and does not dismiss them, but only provides for general meetings under Article 30, paragraph 1, followed by the procedure provided by law under Article 30, paragraphs 2-8 JSA.
Administrative heads have a mandate, as their functions and powers as heads are not part of the judiciary. They have nothing to do with the independence of the judiciary and their irremovability as magistrates.

The reference to Decision № 9/94 of the Constitutional Court is unconvincing. The findings in the reasons for the decision do not exclude another decision, which is also constitutional.

17. Paragraph 40 in the part of art. 129, para 1 JSA regarding the words “initially”

The text is not unconstitutional, as it guarantees the rights of magistrates and does not affect them.

The status of irremovability is acquired after the expiration of 3 years from the appointment of the first magistrate position, regardless of which unit of the judiciary it has been performed. In all subsequent appointments, the magistrate will not be considered to have been initially appointed and no new three-year internship will be required to acquire permanent status. By including the word "initially", it is clarified that the irremovability of the magistrate is not lost when he moves to another position, for example by a judge as a prosecutor or investigator.

The impugned provision equalizes the status of all magistrates (a judge who has served on the spot for three years and joined the prosecutor's office will be irremovable; a contrary interpretation would mean for the incoming judge to start a new term for irremovability).

18. Paragraph 45, item 1, which amends Art. 134, para 3 JSA, in the part regarding the words “not less than 1/5 of the members of the SJC”

With regard to this amendment to the law, which is not unconstitutional, what has been said in item 3 regarding the addition of Article 27, paragraph 1, item 6 of the JSA must be taken into account.

19. Paragraph 45, item 2, which creates para 4 in art. 134 JSA

The provision is not unconstitutional and the motives to item 3 of the opinion up to art. 27, para 1, item 6 are relevant for it.

20. Paragraph 54, which amends Article 143 JSA

The ranks of magistrates are not regulated at the constitutional level and it is a matter of judgment to change the existing regulation of ranks, rename them and remove them.

21. Paragraph 74, which amends Article 168, paragraph 1, item 3 of the JSA

The provision provides for cases in which magistrates are liable if they violate the rules of professional ethics. Since the provision of Art. 27, para 1, item 13 has not been repealed, there is no reason to repeal this text as well.

22. Paragraph 85, which creates a new para 3 of art. 190 JSA

The persons who give permission for leave to the heads under Art. 125a shall notify the chairperson of the SJC thereof.

A constitutional rule concerning the principle of separation of powers has not been violated. The norm is of an organizational nature. The notification shall not give rise to any rights or obligations for the magistrates and shall not affect the independence of the judiciary.

 