JUDGMENT № 4
Sofia, 24 September 2002
constitutional case № 14/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Georgi Markov
(Promulgated, SG No. 93 of October 1, 2002)

 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov - Rapporteur, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on June 12, 2002 at the request of 48 MPs from the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of § 28 of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria (ZIDZOVSRB) - SG, iss. 40/2002

The applicants maintain that the above provision contradicts Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 6, paragraph 2, Article 9, Article 88, paragraph 1 and Article 105, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

By order of 27 June 2002, the application was admitted on the merits. The National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Defense are constituted with the same definition as interested parties in the case.

In pursuance of the opportunity provided to them, written statements on the request were sent by the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Defense, who pleaded for the rejection of the request. The applicants submitted additional considerations in support of their claim.

The Constitutional Court, after assessing the arguments put forward in the request and the opinions of the interested parties, and the evidence presented in the case, accepts the following:

According to the provision of § 28 of the Law on Military Personnel, the age limit for military service is changed as follows: for officers with the rank of “colonel”, “captain I rank” - from 56 to 53 years; for officers with the rank of "Brigadier General", "Brigadier Admiral" - from 57 to 54 years; for officers with the rank of "Major General", "Rear Admiral" - from 58 to 55 years; for officers with the rank of "lieutenant general", "vice admiral" - from 59 to 56 years and for officers with the rank of "general", "admiral" - from 60 to 57 years.

By the same norm, the age limit for officers with the military rank of "colonel" and higher, who are habilitated persons and occupy a position requiring habilitation, as well as for persons with the scientific degree "Doctor of Science" is from 57 to 54 years.

The impugned provision does not contradict the Constitution.

The Law on Amendments to the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria was adopted in two votes, held in separate sittings, which is in full compliance with the requirements of Article 88, para. 1, assoc. first of the Constitution.

Possible violation of procedural rules, not provided for in the Constitution, and in the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly do not lead to violation of the basic law - Decision № 1/1999 under c.d. № 34/98, Decision № 4/1995 on c.d. № 2/95, Decision № 5/1998 on c.d. № 2/98 of the Constitutional Court.

The Constitution does not require full identity of the legislative texts adopted at first and second reading. The Basic Law does not limit the possibility of the legislator on the basis of the debates made and the proposals presented at the first reading by the Members of Parliament to correct and supplement the bills at the second reading. Especially when these proposals do not contradict the principles of the bill adopted at the first vote, as is the case with § 28 ZIDZOVSRB.

The violation of Article 105, paragraph 2 of the Constitution claimed by the applicants due to non-participation in the legislative process of the government and of other state bodies related to the armed forces of the Republic of Bulgaria is also unfounded. This is because Bulgaria is a republic with a parliamentary government and according to the Constitution - art. 1, para. 1, art. 62 and art. 84, item 1, namely the National Assembly exercises sovereign and independent legislative power by adopting, amending, supplements and repeals the laws.

The violation of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution maintained in the request is also missing. It should be borne in mind that restricting the rights of certain social groups of citizens is permissible under the Constitution when these restrictions are socially necessary and we are talking about the effectiveness of the Bulgarian army and the effectiveness of our national security - Decision № 14/1992 on k. e. № 14/1992. In this sense is also Decision № 18/1997 under c.d. № 12/1997, by which the court held that “The right of a person to hold a certain position is not absolute in nature. It is subject to various restrictions of an objective and subjective nature. Such restrictions may stem from different constitutional values ​​and principles… ”In this case, this is the provision of Article 9 of the Constitution, according to which the armed forces must optimally guarantee the sovereignty, security and independence of the country and protect its territorial integrity.

Therefore, the reduction of the age limit for military service cannot be considered as a restriction of rights within the meaning of Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law, as it is the specifics of the activity that has imposed this legislative decision, which is in within the framework of legislative expediency. In this regard, the general trend towards increasing the retirement age in our legislation is irrelevant.

In view of the above and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 48 Members of Parliament from the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of § 28 of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Defense and the Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria (SG, issue 40/2002).

 