Special opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

I signed with a special opinion the decision on c.d. № 15/2002, because I believe that the Law on Amendments to the Law on International Commercial Arbitration (AMLTA) is completely unconstitutional. Outside § 3, para 1 of its transitional provision in its part with the content “cancels the imposed precautionary measures”, which in the decision was correctly declared unconstitutional, the other provisions of the law also contradict the Constitution in my opinion. My considerations are the following:

1. The filing of the claim for annulment of an arbitral award before the Supreme Court of Cassation as a single instance affects the right to defense - Article 56 of the Constitution, Article 122 of the Constitution and Article 124 of the Constitution. Granting the resolution of a civil dispute to only one court, without the possibility of control over its decision, does not create a guarantee of a full right of defense. This is also the case when the only instance is the Supreme Court of Cassation. The enumeration of the courts in Art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution does not mean that every process must necessarily develop in three instances (in this sense, see Decision № 16/98 under Code of Civil Procedure № 7/98). ., promulgated, SG, issue 71/98 and Decision № 27/98 under cd № 20/98, promulgated, SG, issue 121/98). However, one should take into account the special position occupied by the Supreme Court of Cassation among the other judicial bodies in view of Article 124 of the Constitution. Its function is above all to "exercise supreme judicial supervision over the accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts". According to Zhivko Stalev (Bulgarian Civil Procedure Law, 2001, p. 510) "our cassation appeal is a means to achieve, in the words of Article 124 of the Constitution, accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts."

The submission to the Supreme Court of Cassation of the award of a claim procedure, such as the annulment of an arbitral award under Article 47 of the LTA, directly contradicts the function that this court has. The lack of possibility for control over his decision does not provide full protection of the citizen, as required by the reason that the constitutional legislator has invested in Article 56 and Article 122 of the Constitution. On the other hand, this does not make it possible to carry out the supreme judicial supervision provided for in Article 124 of the Constitution for accurate and uniform application of the laws.

It should be borne in mind that the arbitral award differs significantly from the rulings of the state courts. It is issued by a non-governmental body and therefore each legislator approaches it specifically. Although Article 47 of the LTA lists the grounds for revocation, as does Article 231 of the Civil Procedure Code, until § 1 of the LRA the revocation took place with a claim filed before the Sofia City Court. According to Zhivko Stalev (cited above, p. 679) precisely because the arbitral award is a private and not a state act, "its annulment takes place by way of a claim, and not by appeal or extraordinary means of annulment against entered into force court decisions." . This is according to Stalev, because "the issues raised by the annulment of the arbitral award are delicate and require control by appellate and cassation" (cited above, p. 680).

For these reasons and legislation of a number of European member states and associated with the European Union provide for two-instance proceedings for the annulment of arbitral awards, which ensures the control of their supreme courts (eg, Article 75 of the English Arbitration Act, Article 831 and Art. 840 of the Italian Code of Civil Procedure, Article 1062 and Article 1065 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Federal Republic of Germany, Article 1482 of the French Code of Civil Procedure, the Romanian Code of Civil Procedure). Only the Swiss Federal Law on Private International Law of 18 December 1987 (Article 191, paragraph 1) provides for the annulment of arbitral awards in international cases by the Federal Court. The two-stage procedure adopted by the member states of the European Union meets the requirements for better judicial protection and better administration of justice.

There is no precedent under our current law to accept a single-instance claim procedure in civil cases. In order not to violate the right to protection and control over the judicial acts and the amendments to the PPC (SG, issue 70/99), with § 14 (art. 23, para 4) they removed the consideration of the criminal cases for persons with judicial immunity. and ministers before the Sofia City Court.

2. The above-stated contradictions of § 1 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Constitution require that both the provisions of § 2 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights texts that, in my opinion, contradict the Constitution.

 