Dissenting opinion of Judge Nedelcho BeronovI signed Decision № 8 of 3 May 2001 under c.d. № 10/2001 with a special opinion, because I consider that Art. 7, para 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP), promulgated, SG, issue 37 of 13 April 2001. , are not unconstitutional in their disputed part. The holding of elections for the National Assembly is related to expenses, part of which are borne by the candidates for MPs, without being disputed - for travel, posters, advertisements, etc. campaign materials, for rent of premises, for pre-election programs on BNR and BNT and their regional centers (art. 68 ZINP), etc. At the expense of the state budget are the costs of the organizational part - for the preparation and conduct of elections. The election campaign is funded by candidates and through donations that they receive under the undisputed Articles 71 and 72 of the Law on Elections. These costs are also a property barrier for the candidates, but there is no request for the texts governing them to be declared unconstitutional, although the arguments against the challenged provisions can be put forward with the same conviction for the indicated costs. The question of who will bear the costs of producing the ballots does not have a direct answer in the Constitution. Each of the two possible solutions will be tailored to it. The assessment is left to the legislator. The disputed provisions do not contradict Article 10 of the Constitution, according to which elections are held on the basis of universal equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The common suffrage, as historically formed, ensures the participation in the elections of all politically capable persons according to Article 42 of the Constitution. The vote of each voter is equal, exercised personally and secretly. The impugned provisions do not affect any of the elements of active suffrage. Requiring the costs of ballot production to be borne by the candidates does not burden those who have the support and political will of a sufficient number of voters and are therefore able to take responsibility for their possible participation in governing the country. Candidates who do not represent a significant enough number of voters and therefore fail to cross the percentage barrier will not be represented in parliament, and the votes cast for them are subject to redistribution and will benefit other candidates for whom they were not cast. Avoiding this possibility, or at least limiting it, actually supports active suffrage, as well as passive suffrage, because the election will involve candidates backed by a sufficient number of voters with serious intentions and real opportunities. In all elections held under the Constitution of the Republic Bulgaria, the requirement adopted by more countries to distribute mandates to participate only candidates who have received not less than the statutory percentage of actual votes. The so-called percentage barrier raises the same questions that the petitioners point to as a violation of the constitutional provisions relating to citizens' voting rights and political pluralism. However, the percentage barrier has not been challenged in the present case, nor has it been done so far. The principle of political pluralism proclaimed in Article 11 of the Constitution is not violated by the challenged provisions. They are not aimed at creating a monopoly on political power by one party. whose role should be leading in the state, as it was with art. 1, para 2 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria from 1971, in contrast to which art. 11 of the current Constitution has been created. The disputed provisions presuppose the participation in the elections of several times more political parties than those that will manage to get parliamentary representation. The disputed provisions put all candidates for MPs under equal conditions, therefore Article 6 of the Constitution is not violated. In principle, this constitutional provision applies to citizens, but not to legal entities such as political parties. This follows from the wording of the provision. The opposite is not supported in Interpretative Decision № 14/1992 under c.d. № 14/1992