Gentlemen judges,

By order of 13 February 2001, cited above
constitutional case, the Constitutional Court has allowed for consideration
the request of a panel of the PP Division of the Supreme Administrative Court for
establishing the unconstitutionality of 8 6 of the transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act / SG, iss. 44
from 21.U. 1996 and its inconsistency with the provision of Art. 1 of
the Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights
of man and fundamental freedoms / in force for the Republic of Bulgaria from 7
September 1992 /

The cigar transitional provision 6 6 of the State Act
property provides that for the established in the prescribed manner until the entry of
this law in force the right to use real estate - private
state property indefinitely or for more than 10 years the term shall apply
under Art. 56 of the law from the date of its entry into force; and when this one
ten years has expired by that date, the property should be handed over to
six months from that date. And according to the cited provision of Art. 56 from
The Law on State Property right to use real estate -
private state property cannot be established for a period longer than 10
years.

1. According to Art. 17, para. 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria
private property is inviolable. Undoubtedly, the concept of «
property »is used in a much broader sense than the one it has and

legal and technical. According to para. 1 of this provision, the law guarantees no
not only the right of ownership, but also the right of inheritance. And the last one
right covers all the property of the testator, ie. all property
rights. And this guarantee is realized precisely through the announcement of these
rights to inviolability.

But nevertheless it is indisputable that the rules on
immovable property also applies to the rights over them, ie. they find
application to both property and limited property rights
over them. The latter enjoy the same protection as the
property rights. In this sense is the provision of Art. 11 of the Law on
property. This understanding is reflected in the decisions of
The Constitutional Court referred to in the request of the Supreme Administrative
court.

Furthermore, by providing for the termination of an established right to
use of real estate - private state property 6 6 from
the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act,
although established indefinitely or for a period longer than 10 years, is detrimental
this right. That is why this provision is unconstitutional.

2. In our understanding, there can be no question of a reference in this case
of the provision of para. 5 of Art. 17 of the Constitution. Gazi provision creates
possibility for forced expropriation of property for state and
municipal needs. It does not provide in the abstract for the expropriation of property, but
establishes that this can be done for state and municipal needs under
provided by law order and prerequisites. Quite naturally the need for
satisfaction of which the expropriation is carried out, must be specific, i.e.
the state or municipality must need a specific property.

In the case of the contested provision, it actually leads to «
expropriation ”,“ nationalization ”,“ socialization ”like all state ones
properties encumbered with an established real right of use shall be released from
this right regardless of whether there is a need for it or not.

3: In fact, the main issue here should be rather
to the extent that the principle of the rule of law established in accordance with it is not infringed
Art. 4, para. Art. 5, para. 5 of the Constitution. Because with the considered 8 6 of
the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act
are affected and terminated legally acquired rights in accordance with
the legislation in force at the time of their generation. In that
these rights arise under contracts, ie. by the common will of
the state on the one hand and the natural or legal person -
user on the other. The legislator, therefore, intervenes in a situation
legal relationship - a contract for the establishment of a real right of use, such as
decrees its termination and repayment of the incurred for one
country right. On the other hand, the legislator also gives retroactive effect
of the new law, which is inadmissible. The principle of the rule of law is that
the new law is valid only for the future, which follows from the provision of Art. 5,
al. 5 of the Constitution.

4.> It is beyond any doubt that the provision in question of 8 6 neev
compliance with Art. 1 of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Protection
human rights and fundamental freedoms. As exactly stated in
the request of the Supreme Administrative Court the term "property" in this
clause should not be understood in its legal and technical sense. That's not it
means simply possessing things, but encompasses all goods,
included in the property of a legal entity. This means that the protection of
the right of use should also be granted under this text.

CHAIRMAN OF
SUPREME LAW COUNCIL

 

in