ON CD. F 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

As a> interested party in the proceedings before
The Constitutional Court, which is also a party to
the proceedings before the Supreme Administrative Court, the composition of which has referred to the Constitutional Court
court, on behalf of the International Center for Corporate Governance
AD, please take into account the following additional considerations
in resolving the issue of compliance of 66 MANPADS with
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria and with Art from the additional
Protocol to the ECHR:

1 In the attached administrative case He 4918/2000 are contained
evidence that the right of use has been ceded to
the company in accordance with the current at the time of
assignment legislation. Order He RD-15-176 / June 8, 2000
of the District Governor of Sofia District for seizure of a school
Bistritsa base, on the complaint against which this case was initiated,
directly states as its basis the fact that by virtue
of 68 6 of the Law on the Use of Excise Duties, the term of the right of use has expired. IN
our appeal against this order
the unconstitutionality of the provision of 8 6 due
its contradiction with art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution is pointed out as
one of the grounds for appeal. A matter of discretion on the part of
the composition of the SAC, considering the appeal, is to put before

The Constitutional Court questioned the constitutionality of
provision which is the basis of the dispute raised for
the legality of an order challenged in court. In this sense
we emphasize once again that the order was not issued due to
that the right of use has been ceded contrary to the law,
which was in force at its inception, and as a direct consequence of
the effect of the 6 6. Considerations relating to
the legality of the establishment of the real right (which itself
in itself is not disputable and cannot be disputed), they are not
constituted an assessment at no stage of
the procedure for issuing and appealing the administrative act
nor by the administrative authority which issued the contested act,
nor (ie even less) as a subject of judicial review.

It is more than obvious that considerations of this nature do not
can be - neither directly nor implicitly - relevant to
the decision of the case by the Constitutional Court.

2. For the convincing existence of grounds for raising
the question of> the constitutionality of 6 6> MANPADS
testifies to “the content of the request,” addressed 0 to
The Constitutional Court. It fully 3 meets the requirements for
"Establishment" within the meaning of Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

3. Regardless of the specifics of referral to
The Constitutional Court in the case - under the condition of art. 150, para 2 of
The Constitution, the decision of the Constitutional Court will act
egra otpez. It will determine the outcome of the specific case that gave rise to it
the dispute for constitutionality, but does not constitute a decision on
this case. Moreover, those brought before the Constitutional Court
questions do not only concern the specific case, but an indefinite number
a number of other similar cases in which other legal entities
suffer the consequences of the action of 6 6 MANPADS.

4. The content of these effects includes the alienating
effect of the provision, which is why it puts it in relation to
17, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution, to which it must correspond.

Since it is not disputed that the transitional provision of 66 is
intended to settle "existing" legal relations, her
the alienating effect results from the way it has settled them, a
not from its purpose, i.e. from whether it is intended to alienate or not.
Whatever the other purpose of the provision, it must comply with
The Constitution should not create unconstitutional consequences.
Even if it is assumed that the existing legal relations are also subject to
rearrangement according to the term under art. 56, para | ZDS, whatever
consideration can hardly be deduced from the "regime" of
state property within the meaning of Art. 17, para 4 and by

The constitution "in general," again 4 arises "the question of
the preliminary and equivalent compensation in the sense of art. 17,
para 5. The requirements of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution cannot
be neglected in the name of any "balance" between
the interests of the state, on the one hand, and those of others
legal entities, on the other. Quite the opposite: it is through compliance
of these requirements the necessary> fair is achieved
balance (because to> expropriation as a last resort against
property is resorted to in the public interest), and expropriation
without payment of compensation which reasonably corresponds to
the alienated property interest constitutes unjustified interference by
country of the state.

5In that regard, it should be borne in mind that
the equality of economic operators does not follow that and
the state as such has "constitutional" rights. These rights are
established in relation to the state and its obligation is to guarantee
their exercise, not to justify their harm by
non-existent her rights. As far as the protection of the state
property is also in the public (but not in “state”) interest
therefore absolutely necessary, the need for such
protection does not create for the state the right to harm the private
property outside the conditions provided for in the Constitution.

6. By the way, the constitutional framework in which the state can
to act in hypotheses that fully correspond to the present one
case, are clearly outlined in the decisions of the Constitutional
court to which both the request and our initial opinion are
refer.

In the present case, the Constitutional Court must
rule on matters which do not differ from those already resolved,
so there are no grounds for the court to deviate from the previous ones
your decisions. ,,