Dissenting opinion of Judge Stefanka Stoyanova I consider unconstitutional ยง 5 of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents of the former State Security (ZIDZDDBDS) in the part of art. 3, para 3 regarding the persons under para 2, item 2. According to art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution, the right to seek, receive and disseminate information may not be directed against the rights and good of other citizens, as well as against national security, public order, public health and morals. It is limited by the constitutional provision itself, which proclaims it, and the introduction of the restriction protects other duly listed values. Obviously due to its presence, with ยง 5 ZIDZDDBDS in the part of art. 3, para 2, item 2 it is accepted not to disclose the names of persons who were full-time or part-time collaborators of the former State Security or of the former Intelligence Department of the General Staff, if they are not such collaborators of the names indicated in the text. services and if the disclosure of specific data or information about them will harm a specific interest relevant to the national security of the country or will endanger the life and personal freedom of an individual. The conclusion follows from the thus reproduced content of the text, which on the grounds provided for in the Constitution and in order to protect constitutional interests, determines the persons whose names are not disclosed. However, the protection of these interests is excluded by the following provision of the challenged law - para. .3. According to her, the names of the persons concerned are disclosed regardless of the damage to a specific interest of national security or the threat to life and personal liberty of an individual, once the same persons are registered as candidates for President and Vice President, Peoples' Representatives or municipal councilors and mayors. Thus, contrary to Art. 41, para 1, sentence 2 of the Constitution, the right provided by this para 3 to search, receive and disseminate information turns out to be directed against such constitutional priorities as the national security of the country, the right to life and personal freedom. It is precisely this contradiction that I find to justify the existence of unconstitutionality.