Dissenting opinion of Judge Margarita Zlatareva The author of this statement does not share the conclusion in the decision under c.d. № 1/2001 on the unconstitutionality of the provision of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act (FRAA). The provision of § 6 of the FRAA reduces the term for exercising the limited real right of use on state property established before its entry in force for more than 10 years, up to 10 years according to the basic provision for this right under art. 56, para 1 of the LSA. The provision was created with the State Property Act itself, promulgated, SG, issue 22 of 21.05.1996 and aims to rearrange all cases found by it, which are not in sync with the rule of art. 56, para. 1 of the LDA, that the limited real right of use may be established on state property for a maximum of 10 years. According to Art. 17, para 4 of the Constitution, the regime of the objects of state and municipal property is determined by law, which means that the legislator is empowered by the Constitution to regulate the right of ownership for these objects in a way different from the general legal regime of property in general. The constitutional provision applies to both public state property and private state property. Therefore, the rule that the limited real right of use, which is indisputably a derivative of the right of ownership and defensible like it, can be established for a maximum of 10 years on state property, is in line with the Constitution. gives retroactive force to the norm, what is the effect and the meaning of the discussed § 6 of the Law on the Protection of Constitutional Rights and the consequences of whether they reflect on constitutionally guaranteed rights to the extent that the norm is declared unconstitutional. acts, promulgated, SG, issue 27/73, amended, issue 65/95, allows retroactive effect of a normative act by exception, when this is explicitly stated (without the norms, which provide for sanctions), and The Constitutional Court has further developed the rule by specifying in Decision /1 9/1996 that the principle of non-retroactivity of penal norms should also be extended to tax norms. It follows that the possibility by law to give retroactive effect to a substantive rule is not excluded. However, if this retroactive effect affects already acquired rights, it should be considered whether their defensibility competes with other constitutionally guaranteed principles or rights. The right to property as an absolute real right may be limited when a higher interest, such as the state interest, cannot be satisfied in another way, and under certain conditions - Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. According to the argumentum a contrario, the limited right of use should also be able to be limited in the name of the public interest. In this case the hypothesis of expropriation for state need under Art. more than this period. The return of the paid for the time during which this right will not be exercised should be considered as the due compensation for it. The substantiation of the state need, due to which it is necessary to reduce the term of exercising the acquired limited real right to use state property in Adoption of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the Law on State Property has not been made, but MPs have adopted the reasons for adopting the analogous § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the Municipal Property Act - Express transcript 70.3 of 169 sitting of 8.05.1996. of the XXXLII National Assembly. And there the consideration was to equalize the regime of the existing cases, among which there is a gratuitous and indefinite established right of use on state and municipal property, with the regime of future hypotheses, limiting the establishment of this limited real right to 10 years. of the legislator for the adoption of the provision of § 6 of the CRPD, the author of this statement considers that the need to eliminate cases of unjust enrichment of contracts concluded under clearly unfavorable conditions for the state as owner is the higher interest that requires reverse action of the substantive law. The public good is preferred to the protection of private property; the collective interest, understanding the state interest, has prevailed over the private, individual interest. There is the principle of the so-called legal justice. It should also be noted that the second sentence of § 6 of the RZDPZ, allowing the termination of the limited real right within 6 months, when the 10-year period of use has expired at the time of entry of the law in force, means contracts concluded 10 years before the entry into force of the State Property Act. This means that these are legal relations that arose during the operation of the Constitution of 1971, when state property was not divided into public and private, and when there was a constitutional obligation of the so-called national (state) property to be ceded to gratuitous use of cooperatives, public organizations and citizens - Article 17 of the Constitution of 1971. The radically different regime of types of property, introduced by the Constitution of 1991, requires a reorganization of relations related to state property in accordance with the current Constitution , as the provision of § 3, para 1 and 2 of the transitional and final provisions of the Constitution sets requirements for the existing laws. Uncertainty in the legal order, against which the principle of the rule of law, proclaimed in art. 4, para 1 of The Constitution may be considered from a different point of view than the one indicated in the decision. The provision under discussion entered into force on 24.05.1996; most of the existing legal relations have been rearranged, and the users of objects - state property - in other legal relations have the legal expectations during this 5-year period for termination of their right of use. With the declaration of § 6 of the RZDZSS as unconstitutional now, after 5 years the legal uncertainty deepens. Therefore, raising the expediency in this case in a constitutional consideration related to legal justice, the author of the statement considers that the predominance and protection of the collective interest creates the necessary balance between the two groups of persons with affected rights. an action that affects acquired rights is unconstitutional. Constitutional justice considers contract cases in which the difference in public relations regulated by the relevant legal provision is reflected in the conclusions about its compliance with the Constitution. In view of the above, the author of the opinion accepts that the provision of § 6