to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION

from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria

on
constitutional case Ke 10 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of April 19, 2001, we are
constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case Ke 10
for 2001, formed at the request of 61 MPs from the 38th
National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art.
7, para. 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament
(зЗинП).

The request of the group of MPs claims that Art. 7,
al. 2 art. 76 of the ZINP, according to which the costs of production of
the ballots are at the expense of the parties, coalitions and
the independent candidates participating in the elections contradict Art. 42
and Art. 11 in connection with Art. 6, para. 2, Art. 4, para. 2 and the preamble of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, taken in their mutual connection,
as they introduced a barrier to the exercise of both active and
of the passive suffrage of citizens depending on theirs
property status. This follows from the fact that the probable according to

the group of MPs amount required to participate in
elections would be “impossible for the participation of relatively small,
newly formed or simply poor parties ", as a result of which
their candidates were deprived of their passive suffrage, a
their supporters - from their active suffrage.

Indeed, as stated in the request, the Constitution is binding
the state by law and under conditions of equality before it to
guarantees not only the participation of eligible citizens, but also
the free formation and exercise of their political will.
However, this does not mean that the state is obliged to provide unconditionally
opportunity for anyone with the right to vote to be able to vote for
everyone who has the right to be elected. On the contrary, it means
only that the state must create equal and equal conditions
for all participants in the electoral process, guaranteeing freedom
exercising the right to vote and expressing the political will of
side of the electorate and the willingness to take responsibility for
the government of the country by political parties,
coalitions and independent candidates.

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria does not contain a regulation
in connection with the organization and conduct of the elections, and shall be forwarded
to the law. Therefore, the power to establish a comprehensive regulation of
the organization and conduct of the elections, as follows from the explicit ones
texts of art. 42, para. 2, Art. 93, para. 1, art. 138, Art. 139, para. 1 of
The Constitution is given to the legislator. They are part of this system
and the conditions and requirements that must be met for registration
of candidates for participation in the elections. The constitutionality of
the requirements introduced by law should be assessed in the light of
constitutional principles and norms for political pluralism and
equality, but the specific content of the framework within
constitutional "requirements is a matter of" legislative
expediency.

In this case, the requirement to pay production costs
of ballots is only one of the requirements for political parties and
coalitions and independent candidates nominated by the initiative

committees for participation in the elections and it cannot be considered
separate from them. According to Art. 43 et seq. Of ZINP candidacies for popular
representatives can nominate political parties, coalitions and
initiative committees which meet the conditions laid down in
ZINP and in the Law on Political Parties, not every citizen who
has the right to choose. The PDO also sets deadlines and procedures,
which must be met in order for the candidates nominated by
parties, coalitions and initiative committees to take part in
elections.

The purpose of these legal requirements, which are not disputed by
group of MPs, is to provide an opportunity to participate in
the election of organizations and candidates who express the political
will of a sufficient number of voters and who are able to take over
responsibility for its possible participation in the government of the country.
The purpose of the requirement to pay the costs for
production of ballots by parties, coalitions and independents
candidates. That is why the meaning of this requirement can not
be defined as the introduction of a property qualification in contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as alleged in the group's request
people's> representatives. "On the contrary, it> guarantees that
political parties, coalitions and independent candidates are concerned
responsible for their participation in the elections and for their future in the future
participation in the governance of the country and are ready to share with
the state is responsible for conducting the elections by taking over
part of the costs for their own participation in them. There is no contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as on the one hand the addressee of
the obligation to pay the costs of production of
the ballots under Art. 7, para. 2 and under Art. 76 of the ZINP are not the citizens, but
political parties, coalitions and those supported by initiative parties
committees independent candidates, and on the other hand, this requirement applies to
equal degree for all participants in the elections who wish to
nominated candidates and does not create inequalities and privileges
only for some of them.

We do not share the opinion of the group of MPs that
thus limiting active and passive voting
right. On the contrary, this requirement, like all others provided in
legal requirements for parties, coalitions and initiative committees,
are aimed at protecting the right to vote. They defend
active suffrage because, on the one hand, they create guarantees
for voters that serious participation in the elections is allowed
political formations and independent candidates who express
the political will of a sufficient number of voters, on the other hand,
limit the cases of redistribution of votes to voters
to parties for which they have not been submitted, in the cases under Art. 108, para. 1 of
ZINP. They also defend passive suffrage as they create
guarantees for MP candidates that their
candidacies and political positions are supported by political
formations or by a sufficient number of voters with serious intentions
and real opportunities for participation in the governance of the country.

In this regard, it should be borne in mind that all others
costs of organizing and conducting the elections shall be borne by
the state budget, the main source of revenue for which are paid by
voters taxes. If the cost of producing the ballots does not
are taken over by parties, coalitions and independent candidates, the
in practice they will be borne by the voters. We do not consider all
voters should be required to pay to participate in
the election of organizations that do not have serious intentions and
opportunities for participation in the governance of the country and which in some
cases express mainly the leadership ambitions of their leaders, a
not the political will of the voters. After participating in the election
of political parties and coalitions and independent candidates is an expression
of their willingness to take responsibility for participating in
governance of the country, the right of the legislator is to ask them to
prove their responsible attitude towards the state and towards
elections, bearing part of the costs of their participation.

The statement in the request that the determination of
the cost of printing the ballots shall be borne by

The Council of Ministers, without providing a legal framework. According to Art.
76, para. 3 of the ZINP, the Council of Ministers announces the costs for
the production of the ballots and does not determine them. Hence the law
authorizes the Council of Ministers only to disclose the actual ones
costs it will incur for the production of the ballots, a
their determination will be done by negotiating with the contractors at
the terms and conditions of the current legislation and in particular
under the terms and conditions of the Public Procurement Act.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 7,
al. 2 and of Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament is
unfounded and should be rejected. 7