Dissenting opinion of Judges Vasil Gotsev and Zhivan Belchev We believe that § 6 of the TFR of the LDA does not contradict the Constitution. Our considerations are the following: The provision of § 6 of the TFR of the LSA aims to rearrange all cases found by it, in which the term of the right of use ceded to state property has a longer term than the ten-year term under Art. 56, para 1 Article 17, paragraph 4 of the Constitution stipulates that the regime of the objects of state and municipal property is determined by law. This means that it may differ from the general legal regime established for private property. The Law on State Property is authorized by the Constitution to determine the duration of an established right of use over state property. The reduction under § 6 of the TFR of the Law on State Property of the term of established right of use on state property up to ten years really encroaches on the already acquired right of the user, which is protected by Article 17, paragraphs 1, 3 and 5 of the Constitution. But the application of all the provisions of Article 17 of the Constitution with regard to all property, and not only with regard to the right to property, is not a literal but a corresponding application. This means that the specifics of one or another property right also determines the manner of application of the respective paragraphs of Article 17 of the Constitution. Thus, for example, Article 17, paragraph 1 on guaranteeing the inheritance of the right to property cannot be extended to all property rights, some of which are intuito personae (in view of the person) and are inheritable. This is the case, for example, with the service contract for service and construction contracts, when the latter is concluded in view of the individual. These contracts are terminated with the death of the user, the executor of the order or the manufacturer. The use of the legal entity in favor of which it was established shall also be terminated. The specifics of the separate legal institutions, in connection with which rights guaranteed by Art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution arise, shall require the respective application of Art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution. The right of use is not the real right of ownership itself, the compulsory expropriation of which is regulated by Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. The shortening of the term of the right of use of her property ceded by the state is not expropriation in the sense of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution. The very right to property, although inviolable, is not beyond the possibilities of the state to forcibly alienate it for state and public needs under the conditions of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. Hence the conclusion that it is not impossible to reduce the term of the right to use a state property under conditions that are consistent with those provided for in Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. The conditions and the order for expropriation for state and municipal property refer only to the expropriation of the real right of ownership. When encroaching on other property rights, only the basic principles should be observed. With § 6 of the TFR of the Law on State Property the legislator has assessed that under the current economic conditions the establishment of the market economy and the privatization of state property would be difficult if one state property weighs established in favor of another right of use for a period longer than ten years. Therefore, the current regulation of the LSA (Art. 56, para. 1) stipulates that the term for which this right can be established should not be longer than ten years. The radically different regime of property types, introduced by the 1991 Constitution, necessitates a rearrangement of state property relations in accordance with it. It is known that under the 1971 Constitution, the so-called national (state) property was ceded for gratuitous use to cooperatives, public organizations, and citizens, indefinitely. With the shortening of the term from § 6 of the TFR of the LSA, equality is created between the subjects, in whose favor a right of use was established before the current LSA and those who received it under Art. 56, para 1 of the LSA. The opposite would contradict Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, according to which the law must create and guarantee to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity. This determines the need of the state to encroach on already acquired rights under established law. of use with a longer term. The reduction of the term under § 6 of the TFP of the LSA may cause damage to the affected person. He must be compensated for them. The court, before which the question of compensation is raised, will assess whether outside the return of the price paid by the user, respectively the time for which the term is reduced, compensation is due and in what amount. The provision of § 6 TFP of the LSA does not affect free trade. initiative in the economy (art. 19, para 1 of the Constitution). It does not prevent the user whose right of use has been curtailed from continuing his business using another site. As already mentioned, the affected person will receive appropriate compensation if he is harmed. It was stated that the impugned provision equates those who received the right to use under the old law regime with those who received it under the new law. The equalization, which is made by § 6 of the LPA, is in accordance with the legislative protection of all economic entities, provided in Article 19, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. Moreover, the Constitutional Court has had cases to rule that the principles of Article 19, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution are not absolute (Decision № 7/2000 under Code of Civil Procedure № 7/2000, SG, No. 78/2000). They may be restricted in protection of other values ​​(Decision № 3/2000 under Code of Civil Procedure № 3/2000, SG, issue 37/2000). And according to Decision № 18/97 under c.d. 12/97, SG No. 110/97, the right of economic initiative has no absolute character. The freedom of economic initiative does not exclude the principles of state regulation and state control over state activity. The statement that the shortening of the term in respect of already concluded contracts affects the principle of the rule of law (Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution) is unfounded. The retroactive introduction of a substantive civil law norm is not prohibited by the Constitution. The Constitutional Court had occasion to take a position that in the field of substantive civil law the reverse effect of the law does not violate the Constitution and it does not exclude the right of the National Assembly to adopt retroactive norms in this matter (Decision № 9/92 under Art. .e. № 4/92, SG, issue 94/92). It was pointed out that in the cases when the term for which the right of use has been established is reduced, if damages have been caused, they should be compensated by the general claim procedure. This follows from the respective, not literal application of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. Hence, the principles of the rule of law are not violated in this regard either.