OPINION

by VENTSISLAV VARBANOV - Minister of Agriculture and Forestry
on constitutional case Ho 3/2001

SUBJECT: Declaring unconstitutionality of Art. 4,
Art. 7, para. 1, art. 29, Art. 30 Article 31 of the Hunting Act and
game conservation

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

At the request of a group of MPs, the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Bulgaria with its ruling of 22 February 2001
has admitted for consideration on the merits the request for the establishment of
unconstitutionality of provisions of the Hunting and Conservation Act
of game (ZLOD) - SG, no. 78 of 2000

The establishment of the unconstitutionality of
the following provisions of ZLOD: Art. 4, Art. 7, para. 1, art. 29, Art. Article 30 31.

Basically, the allegations of unconstitutionality are
reduce to the following:

- the group of MPs maintains the view that
the provision of art. 4 of ZLOD creates a state monopoly
institution (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) in a broad
activity involving the organization of the hunting area, the management of
the hunting farm and the control over the management of the game, with which
Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constitution;

- in the request to the Constitutional Court the group of deputies shall accept,
that with the texts of the attacked law new public ones are created
relations, which was in contradiction with the provision of Art. 5, para. | from
The Constitution;

- is attacked as an unconstitutional art. 7, para. | from ZLOD.
The said text is interpreted as deprivation of private rights
forest owners, ie as contrary to Art. 17, para. | from
The Constitution;

- the thesis is maintained that the provisions of Art. 29, Art. Article 30 Zot
ZLOD contradict Art. 12, para. | and Art. 44 of the Constitution,
regulating the right of association as a fundamental right of
citizens, as well as of Art. 19, para. | of the Constitution.

In connection with the request thus made for the announcement of
the unconstitutionality of these provisions, we express
the following opinion:

1. Art. 4 osZLOD

With Art. 4 of ZLOD the organization of the hunting area, the management
of the hunting farm and the control over the management of the game are
assigned to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. From the side of
importers complain that a monopoly of
government agency (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) c
a broad activity involving the organization of the hunting area,
the management of the hunting farm and the control of the management of
game.

We do not share the statements of the MPs
for the following reasons:

Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria provides
the law to create and guarantee to all citizens and legal entities
equal legal conditions for economic activity, preventing

abuse of monopoly, unfair competition and protection
consumer.

The challenged provision of Art. 4 of ZLOD does not create a monopoly
situation or unfair competition and does not impede the exercise
of the constitutionally established right of all citizens and
legal persons to enjoy equal rights in their participation in
the economic “life” of the country In the “discussion 94 of
the constitutionality of that provision should be maintained
given the polysubjectivity of the state - in its capacity of state
authority, on the one hand, and of an equal subject of private law, of
other By that provision, the legislature has assigned to
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry implementation of
the state policy in the field of the organization of the hunting area,
the management of the hunting farm and the control of the management of
game.

It should be noted that ZLOD is not the only law that
burdens the specific body of the executive power under
the organization and implementation of the state policy in the respective
area. The contested provision seeks to safeguard its development
the management of the indicated activities in the economic life of the country,
and is not an expression of a state monopoly. Moreover, because of the public
significance of these activities, the Constitution provides not only
the right of the state, through its executive bodies, to
exercises certain sovereign powers, but also an obligation
to do this - Art. 15 of the Constitution: “Art. 15. Republic of Bulgaria
ensures the protection and reproduction of the environment,
the maintenance and diversity of wildlife and the reasonable
use of the country's natural resources and resources ”. From another
country, the organization of the hunting area, the management of the hunting area
holding and control of game management are not economic
activities. The only legal definition of “monopoly
position ”evchl. 16, para. | of the Law on Protection of Competition: “Art.
16. (1) The position of an enterprise, which by law has
the exclusive right to carry out a certain type of economic activity. "

For the above reasons, we consider that the request to announce
of unconstitutionality of the provision of art. 4 of ZLOD, follows
to be rejected.

The allegation that Art. 4 of ZLOD contradicts Art. 5, para. | from
The Constitution, because existing public ones were not regulated

relations, we believe that should also not be supported. That's it
request, "MPs" do not indicate> specifically
contradiction of the provision of art. 4 with the text of the Constitution.
The provision of Art. 5, para. 1 of the Constitution establishes
the supremacy of the Constitution as law and says that other laws
they cannot contradict it. The general reference to the provision of Art.
5, para. 1 of the Constitution should not lead to
unconstitutionality of texts of individual laws. We accept for
the claim of the petitioners that with the text of art. 4 se
create new social relations that did not have their legal
regulation so far, as this contradicts Art. 5,
al. 1 of the Constitution. The hunting law in force before ZLOD
economy (LLS) - revoked, SG, no. 78 of 2000, gave legal regulation to
identical social relations. The adoption of the new Constitution
of the Republic of Bulgaria since 1991 imposed new principles in
the regulation of the existing public relations. This
necessitated the creation of new legislation in the various areas of
public life, including changes in rights and obligations
of legal entities.

2. Art. 7, para. Goth EVIL

With the provision of art. 7, para. | the legislator has accepted that the hunting
area of ​​the country is divided into hunting areas, regardless
from fund boundaries and land, forest and water ownership
areas. In his request to the Constitutional Court, the People's Group
representatives maintain the thesis that the provision of Art. 7, para. |
contradicts Art. 17, para. | of the Constitution, according to which the right to
property and inheritance are guaranteed and protected by law.

We consider the request to be unfounded for the following reasons:

The provision of Art. 7, para. | from ZLOD does not take away the rights of
forest owners, is in line with the constitutional norm for
inviolability of private property and is enforced by
the principle of guaranteeing and protecting the right to property,
established in Art. 17, para. | of the Constitution. From the interpretation of
the said provision and its systematic place in Chapter Two, Section
T "Organization of the hunting area", follows the conclusion that the target
"Regardless of fund boundaries and land ownership,
forests and water areas ”is in connection with one that is essentially pure
technological distribution of the hunting area and the delineation of

hunting areas. In this direction are the next paragraphs of
the attacked art. 7, para. | from ZLOD. For example, Art. 7, para. 5
regulates how the boundaries of hunting areas are determined
- on permanent terrain forms and plantations, compliant with the land ones
borders. On the other hand, the group of MPs do not report
public relations, subject to settlement by law -
"Property relations", protection and
the management of the game ...... ”.

The game, which is privately owned by the state, is managed on
population principle. This means that the game breeds and
inhabits areas - forests, lands and water areas, which fall into different
types of property - private, state, municipal.

In addition, the game migrates and cannot be fixed in

specific hunting area in order to seek a connection with
ownership of forests and lands. Outlining the boundaries of
hunting areas, there is no consequence of limiting
the right to property, much less its deprivation.
The legislator has taken into account that they fall within the boundaries of hunting areas
different type of property and for this, as a guarantee for the protection of
the right of ownership, has also introduced the provision of Art. 38: “Art. 38.
Construction of hunting facilities on lands and forests,
property of individuals and legal entities is carried out after
concluding a contract with them, in compliance with the requirements of
hunting management projects. ”
We do not accept the statement that “... in a forest area - private
property, under a contract with the forestry will be accommodated
another private company that will manage the game and dispose of it,
restricting the rights of the private owner of the forest ”Group
MPs do not further clarify concepts such as “will
accommodate ”and“ will be disposed of ”. State forestry will
grant only the right to manage the game
and to those specified in Art. 34 of the law subjects. The legislator is
provided, the specific conditions and the procedure for direct negotiation, as well as
and to conduct competitions to determine the entity that will
manages the game, to be regulated by the Regulations for application of the law.

Outside the subject of legal regulation remain the right to
ownership or limited real rights over land, forests and
water areas.

The conscientious reading of the provision of Art. 7, para. | in
connection with its systematic place in the law, as well as in connection with the circle

«

public relations, subject to settlement with ZLOD, in our opinion
excludes the validity of the request for unconstitutionality of
attacked text.

3. Art. 29, 30 and З1 from ЗЛОД

The applicants claim that the said provisions
substantially restricted the right of association by taking it away
the right of association of 220,000 Bulgarian citizens, as well as that
the law prohibited associations from conducting business
activity.

Art. 29 of ZLOD regulates the right of Bulgarian citizens,
acquired the right to hunt, to unite in a hunting party (the latter
is not a legal entity), in order to protect their interests for
management and protection of game in a hunting area.
The provision of Art. 30 further develops the idea by providing
the persons under art. 29 from neighboring hunting areas, in the area of
activity of one or several state forestries, to establish
hunting associations for the purpose of carrying out activities related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. They are registered under the Law on Persons and the Family - repealed. in
its part of art. 134-154 in SG, no. 81 of 2000, (current provisions
at the time of entry into force of ZLOD). The text of Art. 31 indicates that
the hunting associations under art. 30 may be established on a voluntary basis
principle of regional hunting associations and national hunting association,
who are registered under the Law on Persons and the Family - revoked. in the part
his of Art. 134-154 SG, no. 81 of 2000, but an act in force at the time of
the entry into force of ZLOD, but without the right to conduct business
activity.

We do not share the thesis stated in the request of the following
grounds:

According to Art. 12 of the Constitution, citizens' associations
serve to satisfy and protect their interests. Art. 44 from
The Constitution proclaims the principle of freedom of association, such as
provides for the law to determine the organizations that are subject to
registration, the procedure for their termination, as well as the relationship.
them with the state. The right of association is a fundamental right of the individual.
As the Constitutional Court has repeatedly emphasized, freedom
exercising the right of association is one of the most important

characteristics of the rule of law, the association is an expression and manifestation of
free will and free choice.

Art. 29, 30 and 31 absolutely proclaim the right of
free association, therefore it cannot be assumed that
these provisions are in conflict with the constitutional ones
requirements for freedom of association. In our opinion, restrictive on
with regard to the right of association as well as the exercise of the right
hunting, were the provisions of the repealed Hunting Act,
where the hunter could only be a citizen, which necessarily
is a member of one organization - the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in
Bulgaria, as the right to hunt was obligatorily tied to
membership of the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in
Republic of Bulgaria.

The submitters of the request claim that with the provisions of Art. 29, 30 and
31 established a ban on hunters' associations to perform
economic activity, which violated the provision of Art. 19, para. 2,
of the Constitution for equal legal conditions for economic activity.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry does not share the expressed in
the thesis request.

Art. 30, para. | of ZLOD explicitly provides that hunting associations
aim to carry out activities "related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. There is no ban on doing business for them. Without
the right to carry out economic activity are the regional hunting ones
associations and the national hunting association.

The introduction by the legislator of a restriction on regional and
the national hunting association to carry out economic activity is
a matter of legislative expediency.

Regional and national hunting associations are forms of
association for which the legislator establishes dispositiveness
about their existence. They are assigned representative,
advisory and support functions. Regional hunting associations and
the national hunting association is not directly involved in
game management. It should be borne in mind that regional and
national hunting associations are associations of hunting associations
under Art. 30 of ZLOD, which are legal entities. That means it is
it is unacceptable to claim that hunters' rights are being violated -
natural persons who unite in hunting associations under Art. 30. For

these hunting associations under Art. 30 the legislator does not introduce restrictions
to carry out economic activity.

The provision of Art. 44, para. 3 of the Constitution has provided
the right of the legislator, in his assessment of the expediency of.
determine the relations of the state with the associations, ie yes
give legal regulation of the type and nature of their performance
activity.

For the above reasons, we believe that this request should
be rejected. s

w