JUDGMENT № 7Sofia, 10 April 2001.constitutional case № 1/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Vasil Gotsev (Promulgated, SG No. 38 of 17 April 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev - rapporteur, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva. of the SAC by the order of art. 150, para 2 of the Constitution. When considering the adm. d. № 4918/2000 the applicant “International Center for Corporate Governance” AD developed considerations for contradiction of § 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act (TFL) with the Constitution, which the court accepted as justified. He suspended the proceedings in the case and made a request to the Constitutional Court to establish the unconstitutionality of the provision of § 6 of the TFP ZDS (SG, issue 44 of 21 May 1996, amended, issue 104 of 1996, issue 55, 61 and 117 of 1997, issues 93 and 124 of 1988, issues 67 of 1999 and issues 9, 12, 26 and 57 of 2000) due to contradiction with art. 17, para . 3 and 5, Art. 19 and Art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution and for inconsistency with Art. 1 of the First Additional Protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (SG, issue 66 of 1992). , amended, SG No. 137/1998). The request also states Art. 149, para 1, item 4 as a legal basis, but the statement does not contain a request for interpretation of a text of the Constitution. According to Art. 56, para 1 of the LDA, the right of ownership over real estate - private state property, shall be established for a term not longer than 10 years. According to the contested before the Constitutional Court § 6 of the TFP LPA for the right of use established until the entry into force of the law indefinitely or for more than 10 years . When it has expired on the date of entry into force of the law, the right of use is terminated and the property is transferred to the state within six months from the same date. According to the composition of the Third Department of the SAC: 1. The reduction of the term from § 6 of the TFR to 10 years restricts the right to property, protected by Art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution. In essence, this means forced expropriation of property and all requirements of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution: - specifically proven state or municipal need that cannot be met in another way and prior fair compensation.2. There was also a contradiction with Article 19 of the Constitution. According to the request, the principle of free initiative was violated (Article 19, paragraph 1 of the Constitution), guaranteeing all citizens and legal entities equal conditions for economic activity (Article 19, paragraph 1). .2 of the Constitution) and the protection of investments and economic activity (Art. 19, para 3 of the Constitution). It is pointed out that when the state carries out economic activity and participates in the civil turnover by concluding contracts, it acts under equal legal conditions with all citizens and legal entities. Article 19, paragraphs 2 and 4 of the Constitution applied not only to citizens and legal entities, but also to the state and municipalities.3. Reducing the term of use was also inconsistent with the principle of the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The rearrangement of relations to which the state is a party, by law violates the constitutionally guaranteed rights of economic entities. This is contrary to the requirement of legal certainty, which is an element of the content of the rule of law.4. In addition to all the above, § 6 of the TFP was in conflict with Article 1 of the First Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The request of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court to establish the unconstitutionality of § 6 of the TFR was allowed for examination of the merits by order of the Constitutional Court of 13 February 2001. The request for recognition of incompatibility with the First Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was not admitted for consideration by the order of the Court of 5 April 2001 and in This part of the proceedings has been terminated. In pursuance of the opportunity provided to them by the Constitutional Court, opinions on the merits of the request were expressed by the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works, the Minister of Finance, the Sofia District Governor, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Chamber, the Union of Employers in Bulgaria, “Me International Center for Corporate Governance AD ​​Sofia, the Supreme Bar Council, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee and the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation. A request has also been received from Shell Bulgaria AD stating that it has an interest in the issue raised. and asks to be constituted as an interested party in the case, having also presented his opinion. The Speaker of the National Assembly has sent an opinion to the Parliamentary Committee on Legal Affairs and Anti-Corruption Legislation, which provides the decision to the Constitutional Court without expressing an opinion. The Supreme Court of Cassation and the Bulgarian International Business Association have expressed opinions. The Supreme Administrative Court has not submitted additional considerations in support of the request of the Third Division of the court, as given the opportunity. and the district governor of the district of Sof They state that § 6 of the TFR does not contradict the Constitution, as in this case it is not a question of expropriation of property rights, but of reorganization of the state property regime in view of the Constitution of 1991, whereby the subjects who received right of use on state property under the old law on state property and that of the current law on state property. According to them, there is no prohibition in the Constitution to introduce retroactive effect of civil substantive laws. In their opinions, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Union of Employers in Bulgaria, International Center for Corporate Governance AD ​​Sofia, the Supreme Bar Council, The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Bulgarian Human Rights Advocates Foundation and Shell Bulgaria AD fully support the applicant's considerations - Division III of the Supreme Administrative Court. In order to rule on the merits of the request, the Constitutional Court took into account the following: is a limited real right, which is regulated by Article 59 of the Insurance Act. It can be established by the owner for a certain period or indefinitely. By its nature, it is an absolute right. This determines its closest connection with the right of ownership.1. Regarding the contradiction with Article 17 of the Constitution, the use of a thing may be granted to a person other than the owner of the thing. From the point of view of its content in the specific case it is irrelevant whether the right of use has the character of a real right or a claim. There is no doubt that in all cases the right of use is monetary. It is a property for its owner, a property right. In this broad sense, understood as property, it is part of the patrimony of its holder, his property. Therefore, once established, the right of use is considered and protected by law separately from the right of ownership over the thing (property) itself. The Constitution protects property in the broadest sense of the word. It provides such protection to receivables and, with even greater justification, to property rights. The Constitutional Court has explicitly extended the protection of the ownership of the receivables - "… a private receivable… may be forcibly expropriated, but only under the conditions of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution…" - Decision № 22 of 10 December 1996 on k.d. № 24/96 (SG, issue 1 of 1997). In Decision № 17 of 16 December 1999 under c.d. № 14/99 the court explicitly noted that the receivables "… are unconditionally covered by the constitutional protection of property contained in Article 17, paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Constitution" (SG, issue 113 of 1999). The Constitution provides for the possibility of compulsory expropriation of property (including the right of use) in Article 17, paragraph 5. However, in order to realize this possibility, it is absolutely necessary to comply with several (cumulatively given) additional requirements. The requirements will only be listed here, without being considered in detail: the act of expropriation (individual) to be "based on law"; the expropriation should be for state and municipal needs, which "cannot be satisfied in any other way"; providing prior and equivalent compensation to the persons concerned. There is no doubt that the impugned norm has an expropriating effect. It revokes a legally established right of use for a period of more than 10 years. The fact that this right is established on state property is irrelevant to the Constitution. The right of use belongs to another person, different from the state and its revocation is admissible only in compliance with the conditions provided in Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. The statement that the norm does not take away the right to property, but only rearranges the legal relations that have arisen retroactively, is untrue and meaningless. Reorganization is only a legislative approach. The legal effect (and purpose) of this reorganization is precisely the revocation of the right of use for a period of more than ten years; a right which the user has acquired in good faith and lawfully. In the specific case it cannot be maintained that the disputed norm meets the constitutional standards. Even if it is assumed that there are separate contracts concluded under unfavorable conditions for the state, which justifies the state's need to terminate them, there is no legal formula to ensure that the norm will apply only to unfavorable contracts. The regulation leads to the termination of any right of use upon expiration of the 10-year term, regardless of the manner of its establishment and the benefit for the state. The termination opens an opportunity to negotiate with new, nicer users. Separately, the guarantee of the other constitutional conditions - the payment of preliminary and equivalent (market) compensation - remains in question. The compensation is preliminary when it is paid before the revocation of the right of ownership. The norm does not provide for such compensation. The abstract in this case possibility for compensation of the occurred damages, after conducting long cases with unclear end, in no way can replace the constitutional requirement for preliminary and equivalent compensation. use before the expiration of the agreed term, exceeding 10 years, violates art. 17, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution.2. Regarding the contradiction with art. 19, para 1, 2 and 3 of the ConstitutionAccording to art. 19, para 1 of the Constitution the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria is based on the free economic initiative. Free business initiative can be developed only with legal certainty for legal entities in carrying out their business activities. According to Article 20a of the Law on Obligations and Contracts, the contract concluded between the parties is a law for them. The changes in the terms of a contract concluded with one law undoubtedly create uncertainty in the implementation of the business initiative and hinder its free development. According to Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the law creates and guarantees to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity. With regard to state-owned property, the state acts as an equal and equal partner in legal relations to which it is a party. This means that it cannot by law unilaterally change the terms of a contract it has concluded. Hence, the term of a contract to which it is a party cannot be reduced by law. In its Decision № 19/93 under c.d. № 11/93 (SG, issue 4/94), the Constitutional Court explicitly confirmed this understanding, saying that in the exercise of private property all legal entities are equal. Art. 19, para 2 and 4 refer not only to the citizens and the legal entities, but also to the state and the municipalities ”. In its private relations with third parties, the state is an equal subject with them. It is inadmissible by law to create for itself more favorable rules under already concluded contracts. Subsequent legislative change under a contract between the state and third parties violates the principle of equality. Such a change is unconstitutional and invalidates the rule of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. Along with all that has been said, § 6 of the TFR also contradicts Article 19, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. The ceded right of use over state property is always related to investments and economic activity of Bulgarian and foreign citizens, which are protected by the constitutional provision. It is normal for the investments to be complied with and for the economic activity to develop in view of the duration of the contract, for the ceded right of use. The shortening of its term by a law that has retroactive effect is more than obviously contrary to the constitutional principle of protecting investments and economic activity by law. This shortening of the term can be an unbearable burden, both for the investor and for the state itself, if it has to pay for the investments made. It should be borne in mind that many foreign investments have been made by establishing the right of use due to the explicit prohibition of Article 22, paragraph 1 of the Constitution for foreigners and foreign legal entities to acquire the right of ownership over land. Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the VAT Act encroaches on investments made and creates uncertainty for future investments.3. Regarding the contradiction with the principle of the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, the challenged provision has a retroactive effect. It concerns contracts concluded before it. It is true that the Constitution does not prohibit the substantive civil law from retrospectively (Decision № 9/92 under Code of Civil Procedure № 4/92, SG No. 64/92). In the case of § 6 of the TFR, however, legal relations are rearranged, which encroach on acquired rights, which creates a danger for the confidence in the Bulgarian law and in the stability of the legal framework in our country. It cannot be assumed that the challenged provision reorganizes the state property regime in accordance with the new Constitution. It is the new Constitution that contains conditions that prohibit rearrangement in the manner provided for in § 6 of the TFR. The termination by law of a legal position in favor of the state and to the detriment of those with whom it has negotiated, contradicts the principle of the rule of law, raised by Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and is an infringement on the foundations of ed. "The rule of law… means, inter alia, that the foundations of the rule of law enshrined in the Constitution apply equally to the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, as well as to all other legal entities" (Decision № 17 / 99 under cd № 14/99, SG, issue 113/99). When the reverse effect of a law that infringes acquired rights is not motivated in favor of the highest public interest, without a clear will to settle the consequences, it cannot be defined otherwise than as expropriation. And this, in turn, violates not only Article 17 of the Constitution, but also contradicts the principle of the rule of law, enshrined in Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. For the stated reasons and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph .1, item 2 of the Constitution The Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Declares unconstitutional the provision of § 6 TFP of the LDA (SG, issue 44 of 21 May 1996, amended, issue 104/96, issue 55, 61, 117/1997, nos. 93 and 124/98, nos. 67/99 and nos. 9, 12, 26 and 57/2000).