JUDGMENT № 13Sofia, 29 May 2001constitutional case № 2/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Penka Tomcheva (Promulgated, SG No. 51 of 5 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva - rapporteur The Constitutional Court was seised with two separate requests to establish the unconstitutionality of the law. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (Interpretative Law), prom. SG, no. 108 of December 29, 2000. The first is of January 19, 2001. and its petitioners are 56 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly, in which the present case was instituted. For the second request from 5.02.2001 the initiator is a court panel from the III division of the Supreme Administrative Court - c.d. № 4/2001. Given the community of the request of the indicated independently legitimized under Art. 150, para. 1 and para. 2 of the Constitution subjects and the need to issue a decision, with a ruling of 13.02.2001 later the case was joined to the first. According to the petitioners the first sign of unconstitutionality of the attacked in its entirety Interpretative Law is that the National Assembly is not assigned by the Constitution and in particular by Art. 84, item 1 to interpret the laws, but only to adopt, amend, supplement and repeal them. The main considerations of the petitioners - MPs are that the interpretation could replace the actual will of the legislator. The petitioner - a panel of judges of Division III of the SAC, in addition, considers that the legislature violates the basic constitutional principle of separation of powers, formulated in Art. 8, as well as the provisions of art. 124 and Art. 125 of the Constitution. The second part of the request contains considerations on the merits of the Interpretative Law. In summary, they are reduced to the unconstitutionality of the interpreted text of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (LFRB), prom. SG, no. 153 / 23.12.1998, amended, SG, iss. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Minister of Justice, the Ministers of Foreign and Internal Affairs were constituted as interested parties by a ruling of 13.02.2001. Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Prosecutor General and the Supreme Bar Council. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Foundation have submitted written statements on behalf of these countries. Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights ”,“ Bulgarian Helsinki Committee ”and the Supreme Bar Council, according to which unanimity was expressed on the issue of the possibility for the National Assembly to give an authentic interpretation of laws already adopted by it with a separate interpretative law, without violating constitutional principles and norms. In the essence of the Interpretative Law the opinions are opposite The Council of Ministers, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the National Assembly consider that a single article of the Interpretative Law does not contradict the Constitution. According to the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation and the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the essential part of the Interpretative Law is unconstitutional on the same grounds as it contradicts the Constitution and the interpreted Art. 47 of the FRBA. The basic right to protection under Art. 56 of the Constitution. In order to rule, the Constitutional Court took into account the following: І. On the issue of the possibility for the National Assembly to adopt interpretative laws, the three constitutions of the country preceding the present one provide for a special National Assembly directly according to Art. 44 of the Tarnovo Constitution of 1879, and through its permanent bodies, such as the Presidium under Art. 35, item 4 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria of 1947 and the State Council under Art. 93, item 8 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria from 1971, to give obligatory for all interpretations of the laws. In the current Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria from 1991 in Chapter III, dedicated to the National Assembly, a constitutional norm that explicitly allows or prohibits the legislature from interpreting the laws, no. From this, as well as from those formulated in Art. 84, item 1 of the Constitution legislative competences, among which to adopt, amend, supplement and repeal the laws it follows that the National Assembly may also interpret them. Subsequent clarification and refinement of the wording of a legal norm through interpretation so as to clearly understand the meaning, scope and purpose invested in it at its initial creation is an opportunity from which there are no constitutional reasons to deprive the National Assembly. In order to give equal force and significance to the interpretative act with those of interpretations, it is necessary that the form of the two acts be the same. In this sense, the Constitutional Court has already incidentally expressed an opinion in Decision № 13 of 1996 on c.d. № 11/96, SG, no. 66/96. The interpretive activity of the National Assembly, carried out by law, ie with an act which, both because of the author and because of its form, has universal force and obligation for all, in no way replaces what is provided by the Constitution of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court with Art. 124 and Art. 125 right they to exercise supreme judicial supervision for accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts. The possibility in the interpretation to replace the actual will of the legislator with another is an unconvincing argument, as far as this is no less possible in the exhaustively indicated in Art. 84, item 1 of the Constitution activities, namely for amendment, supplement and repeal of the laws. The current parliamentary practice of repeatedly amending adopted and applied legal provisions is a reality. On the merits of the Interpretative LawThe provision of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, which provoked the adoption of the challenged Interpretative Law, was repealed by § 35 of the adopted, meanwhile and entered into force on the day of its promulgation in SG, no. 42 of 27.04.2001, Law to amend and supplement the LFRB. No repeal of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the LFRB, subject of the present proceedings. In view of the indicated new legislative permission (repeal of the interpreted norm) and the lack of explicit repeal of the Law for its interpretation, the question arises to what extent the repealed provision of Art. 47 On this issue the Constitutional Court accepts that insofar as the Interpretative Law contains others, outside the interpretative norms, implicitly included in the general formulated request for declaring the entire law unconstitutional, they as part of the subject of the request may and should be checked. For such norms the court should rule on the merits. With regard to the norms of the disputed law, the nature of which is explanatory, interpretative, the repeal of the interpreted norm makes it meaningless to check the unconstitutionality of the Interpretative Law in this part. Moreover, due to the lack of a subject according to art. 22, para 1 of the Law on the Constitutional Court, in the part for the interpretation the proceedings should be terminated. The content of the sentences from first to fifth inclusive of the only article of the disputed fully Interpretative Law have interpretative character because: in the first sentence the concrete texts from LFRB, orders under which are not subject to judicial review. The following second, third, fourth and fifth sentences, although unnecessary, in fact re-descriptively explain the interpretation of the first sentence, which outlines the textual scope of the prohibition of judicial review. The repeal of this rule invalidates the interpretation, which implies that the Interpreter law in the part for sentences from first to fifth inclusive is without subject. The interpretative norm in this part has no independent meaning and application, outside and independently of the interpreted, meanwhile repealed norm of art. 47 of the FRBA, due to which the proceedings should be terminated. The meaning of sentence six of the fully disputed Interpretative Law is different, which reads: “Judicial act on the merits, ruled on an appeal against an order issued on the basis of Art. 40, para. 1, item 2 in connection with Art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, item 1 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, is null and void and does not give rise to legal consequences ”. With the cited part of the Interpretative Law, the National Assembly as a body of the legislative power has exercised more than the ones constitutionally provided to it by Art. 84, Art. 85 and Art. 86 rights. The legislative approach adopted by the cited sixth sentence with regard to the court decisions rendered so far and entered into force indicates a kind of administration of justice by the legislative body. It is obviously unconstitutional. The principles of the rule of law, the separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary (Art. 4, Art. 8 and Art. 117, para. 2 of the Constitution) have been violated. There is no constitutional norm that allows the legislature to rule on the validity of judicial acts issued by the independent judiciary on specific, individual disputes. In the part for sentence six of the only article, the Interpretative Law has no interpretative character, but is an expression of the decisive will of the Legislative Assembly for a certain category of entered into force decisions issued by the independent judiciary. In this sense is also Decision № 4 of 1998 under c.d. № 16/97. In this part the disputed law should be declared unconstitutional. The subsequent development of the court cases, initiated and unfinished before the repeal of Art. 47 of the LFRB, should find a legislative solution in the transitional and final provisions of the Law for amendment and supplement of the LFRB, SG, iss. 42 of 27.04.2001 (LIDHRB), insofar as with the mentioned law the procedure for appealing the administrative orders under LFRB has been changed, incl. with regard to the court competent to rule on the appeals subject to judicial review (§ 33 of the Law on the Protection of Judicial Achievements). Based on the stated considerations, on the grounds of Art. 149, para. 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: 1. Declares unconstitutional the sixth article of the only article of the Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, promulgated in SG, issue 108, of 29.12.2000, with the following content: “Judicial act on the merits, ruled on an appeal against an order issued on the grounds of Art. 40, para 1, item 2 in connection with Art. 10, para 1, item 1, on the grounds of Art. 42 or on the grounds of Art. 10, para 1, item 1 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, is null and void and does not give rise to legal consequences ”. Terminates the proceedings in the case initiated at the request of 56 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly and Judicial Chamber of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court to declare unconstitutional the Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria in its remaining part regarding Article sole, sentences 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 and the final provision.