JUDGMENT № 16Sofia, 12 June 2001constitutional case № 6/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Georgi Markov (Promulgated, SG No. 56/22/2001) Member State: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov - rapporteur, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted on March 9, 2001 at the request of 59 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly. It is requested to establish the unconstitutionality of the following provisions of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (LSBRB for 2001) - SG, issue 108/2000, namely: of Art. the part under item 1.11.1., 5.1.1. and 5.2.1 .; Article 2, paragraph 1, item II, para 2, para 5 in the part regarding the word “overfulfillment” and para 8; Article 9, paragraphs 1 and 2; Article 10, paragraph 1; Article 11, paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 5; Art. 13, para 4 and 5 in the part regarding the words “the bodies of the judiciary”, “and the mayors”, “art. 2, para 2” and “art. 9, para 2”; § 9; § 20; § 22, para 2 and 3; § 26; § 30; § 35, para 2; § 37 of the transitional and final provisions and Annexes № 3 and № 4 of the same law. It is also requested to establish the inconsistency of the challenged provisions, referring to the municipal budgets, with the principles of the European Charter of Local Self-Government. By order of 15.03.2001 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits. With the same definition as interested parties in the case The following are constituted: the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works, the Supreme Judicial Council, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria. , The Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Supreme Judicial Council and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Finance plead for the rejection of the requests in full. The Supreme Judicial Council (SJC) maintains that the provisions of Art. 2, para. 1, item II and para. 2 of the Law on Municipalities for 2001 are unconstitutional. The National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria is in favor of respecting the request regarding the provisions related to budgets of the municipalities. The Constitutional Court, after considering the considerations developed in the request, the opinions of the parties, as well as the evidence attached to the case, accepted the following: I. Regarding the unconstitutionality of the provisions of the Law on the Judiciary for 2001, referring to the budget of the judiciary. Under Art. 2, para. 1, item II. , art. 130 and art. 131 of the Constitution. Indeed, with Decision № 17/1995 under c.d. № 13/95 (SG, issue 93/95) The Constitutional Court has given a mandatory interpretation of the Basic Law in the sense that the SJC has an independent budget, which is voted by the National Assembly in its entirety as the budget of a body of the judiciary. It is stated that any law on the annual state budget of the country, which lacks funds for certain constitutionally established state institutions, can be declared unconstitutional, as it paralyzes their activities. By the same decision the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional the refusal of the Parliament to include in the law on the state budget for the respective year on an independent order the budget of the SJC. The Constitutional Court does not abandon its principled opinion expressed in the above interpretative decision, that the SJC has a budget that is an integral part of the budget of the judiciary, but is independent of the budgets of the other, judicial bodies of that system. In this case, however, the court held that the impugned legal provision, which adopted the budget of the judiciary for 2001, did not deprive the SJC of funds for current expenses and did not paralyze its activities. There is practically no refusal on the part of the parliament to provide funds for the functioning of this constitutionally established state body. This is also evident from the will of the legislator in adopting the provision in question in the plenary hall. Funds for running costs for the SJC are included in the total running costs for the entire judiciary. In allocating the budget of the judiciary to the relevant bodies, the SJC allocates the planned and necessary funds for its functioning. Due to the fact that the State Budget Law for 2001 provides funds for the normal functioning of the SJC, although they are not described separately. position), which would be more precise from the point of view of the basic law, the provision of art. 2, para 1, item II is not unconstitutional. Under art. 2, para 2. The attacked provision of art. 2, para .2 The State Budget Law for 2001 approves a subsidy from the budget of the judiciary in the amount of 90% of the determined amount under para 1, as the remaining 10% shall be provided only in case the approved with art. 1, para 3 is not exceeded. budget deficit. According to the applicants, Article 8 and Article 117, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Basic Law were thus violated. The Constitutional Court held that there had been no violation of the principles of separation of powers and independence of the judiciary, enshrined in Article 8 and 117, para 2 of the Constitution. With the provision of art. 1, para. 2 of the State Budget Law for 2001 an independent budget of the independent judiciary was adopted, which is in full compliance with art. 117, para. 3 of the basic law. Sovereign right of the National Assembly under art. 84 , item 2 of the Constitution is when adopting the state budget to determine the manner and conditions of receiving the subsidy of all state bodies, including those of the judiciary. There is no constitutional norm that restricts the legislature on this issue. That is why Art. 2, para. 2 of the LSBRB for 2001 is not unconstitutional. Under Art. 2, para. 5, in the part regarding the word “overfulfillment” According to Art. of the revenues from fees from the activity of the bodies of the judiciary is at the expense of the republican budget. The applicants attacked the provision only with regard to the word “overfulfillment”, considering that Article 117, paragraph 3 of the Constitution had been violated due to interference in the independent budget of the independent judiciary. With Decision № 18/1993 under c.d. № 19/1993 (SG, issue 1/94) The Constitutional Court has accepted that the judiciary is supported by the budget. The sources of funds necessary for balancing the annual expenditures voted by the Parliament are raised through the revenue part of the republican budget. The legal regulation of the sources of funds by origin, basis and distribution is contained in the relevant structural law on the budget, which is also adopted by the parliament. It should be borne in mind that the independence of the budget of the judiciary does not violate the budgetary powers of the supreme legislative body - the National Assembly. Therefore, there is no constitutional obstacle to the overfulfillment of revenues from fees from the judiciary at the expense of the national budget. . Moreover, the non-fulfillment of the envisaged revenues from fees from the activity of these bodies is also at the expense of the republican budget. In this sense is also Decision № 15/1997 under c.d. № 9/1997 - SG, issue 101/97. In view of the above, the challenged provision is not unconstitutional. Under Art. 2, para 8C this legal norm is provided in the cases when the bodies of the judiciary are housed in buildings - state or municipal property, they do not pay rent. The submitters of the request consider that there is a violation of the principle of the rule of law - Art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution, as the lease legal relations are always remunerative. According to the Constitution the state properties are managed and managed in the interest of the citizens and the society - art. 18, para 6 of the basic law. The regime of the objects of state and municipal property, on the other hand, is determined by the law - art. 17, para 4 of the Constitution. The legislator has considered that it is in the interest of the citizens and the society that the judicial bodies, housed in state and municipal buildings, not to pay sums for their use. Obviously, the National Assembly has chosen an approach that it deems most appropriate from the point of view of the process. of drawing up and execution of the state budget. There are no expenditures in the budget of the judiciary for the payment of rents in cases where the budget revenues of other bodies from these rents would be reflected in the amount of the subsidy. It should be borne in mind that the interests of the state and municipalities can not to be measured only in cash income from the rental of the building stock, which is state or municipal property. The legislator has considered that the public interest requires the judiciary to be close to the population of the respective settlement. In view of the above, Article 2, paragraph 8 of the State Budget Law for 2001. it is not unconstitutional. II. Regarding the unconstitutionality of the provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001, referring to the budgets of the municipalities under Art. 1, para 2, in the part of items 1.11.1., 5.1.1., 5.2.1. and art. 9, para 1 and 2 and Appendix № 3С item 1.11.1. of Art. 1, para 2 of the State Budget Law for 2001, targeted social benefits to the municipalities in the amount of BGN 60,000.0 are envisaged, and in item 5.1.1. of the same provision a subsidy for them in the amount of BGN 537,892.2. With item 5.2.1. of the attacked provision the contributions from the municipalities (net) are determined at BGN 56,361.3. With art. 9, para 1 of the law are accepted by methodology according to Appendix № 3 the amounts of the net relations of a certain amount in the form of general and targeted subsidies and contributions and unallocated expenditures in the republican budget. Paragraph 2 of the same article approves a subsidy to the municipalities in the amount of 90% of the amounts determined under para 1 without the targeted subsidies for social benefits, as the remaining 10% is provided only in case the approved with art. 1 is not exceeded. , para 3 of the law budget deficit. According to the petitioners the texts in question are unconstitutional because they violate the independence of municipal budgets, which is a distinctive feature of local self-government - Article 141, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. They consider that the law does not provide funds for the normal functioning of the municipalities. The Constitutional Court accepts that the above provisions do not violate the Constitution. With the provisions of art. 2, para 1, item 1.11.1. and 5.1.1. targeted social benefits and subsidies to the municipalities, the legislator has fulfilled its obligation under Article 141, paragraph 3 of the Basic Law. According to this constitutional provision, the state is obliged to support the municipalities, including through funds from the state budget. On the other hand, subsidies and contributions are an element of budgetary relations between the state and the municipalities. Through the mechanism of the methodology provided for in the law, a balance is achieved between national and local interests and protection of the financially weaker municipalities. In this sense is also Decision № 2/2001 under c.d. № 10/2000 (SG, issue 9/2001). Article 20 of the Constitution should also be taken into account, according to which the state is obliged to create conditions for balanced development of the separate regions of the country. 10, para 1 This provision stipulates that when compiling the municipal budgets for 2001 the amount of funds for social benefits under the Social Assistance Act and the Decree for Birth Promotion may not be less than twice the amount provided by Art. 9, para 1 targeted subsidies for social benefits. According to the applicants the adopted approach does not correspond to art. 47, para 1 and art. 51 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court accepts that art. 10, para 1 of the State Budget Law for 2001 is in accordance with the constitutional provisions in question. They explicitly state that the mother enjoys special protection of the state and that citizens have the right to social assistance. It should also be borne in mind that according to the preamble of the Basic Law, the Republic of Bulgaria is a welfare state. That is why the state can assign social functions to the municipalities by law. Neither from art. 47, para. 1, nor from art. 51 of the Constitution, to which the petitioners refer, follows the conclusion maintained by them that social assistance and care for children they are the sole responsibility of the state. Moreover, a number of constitutional provisions (Art. 51, para. 3 and Art. 52, para. 2) define the protection of those in need of social assistance as an obligation of both the state and society, from which they can undoubtedly not be excluded. municipalities. That is why the challenged legal provision does not contradict the Constitution. Under Art. 11, para 1, 2, 4 and 5, the legal texts in question regulate the manner of financing by the central government of the capital expenditures of the municipalities and the admissibility of internally compensated changes. that these provisions are in conflict with the constitutional principle of independence of municipal budgets. Their thesis is that the Minister of Finance cannot approve the budget estimates by approving the estimates for financing the capital expenditures of the municipalities, financed with funds from the target subsidy. It should be borne in mind that the state through budget funds and other way supports the normal activity of the municipalities - art. 141, para 3 of the Constitution. There is no obstacle from the point of view of the basic law the financial support of the municipalities to take place in specific cases in the form of targeted subsidies. The provision of targeted subsidies for the implementation of repair programs and projects is the result of a certain state policy. This follows from the provision of Article 20 of the Constitution, according to which the state creates conditions for balanced development of the individual regions of the country. In addition, the government manages the domestic policy of the country and the implementation of the state budget - Article 105, paragraph 1 and Article 106 of the Basic Law. In view of this, the powers of the Minister of Finance to approve the estimates for financing the capital expenditures of the municipalities, financed by the targeted subsidy, do not contradict the Constitution. Under Article 13, paragraphs 4 and 5 in part, regarding the words “the bodies of the judiciary, ”“ and the mayors ”,“ Art. 2, para 2 ”and“ Art. 9, para 2 ”According to these texts, the municipal councils approve priorities on which the funds received from their budget are spent, except for those with purpose. The mayors, on the other hand, may assume obligations for expenses in compliance with the restrictive conditions under Art. 2, para 2, Art. 3, para 2, Art. 4, para 3, Art. 6, para 2, Article 7, paragraph 2, Article 9, paragraph 2. The same applies to the bodies of the judiciary. According to the applicants, these provisions are in contradiction with Art. 7, para. 2 of the Municipal Budgets Act, and hence with Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 141, para 1 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court accepts that the independence of the municipal budgets does not mean that the legislator cannot introduce rules for the process of drawing up and implementation of municipal budgets. The National Assembly may adopt, as appropriate, restrictive norms with a view to more efficient control over the appropriate execution of expenditures. In this sense is also Decision № 2/2001 under c.d. № 10/2000. Therefore, the provision does not contradict the basic law. Under § 9; § 20; § 22, para 2 and 3; § 26; § 30; § 35, para 2 and § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001. According to § 9 and Annex № 4The relevant provisions determine the extra-budgetary accounts and funds for 2001. Thus, for example, item 1 of Annex № 4 creates Fund "Professional Qualification and Unemployment" at the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy. The compilation, implementation and reporting of the budget are state activities related to the management of the country (Decision № 11/1995 under Code of Civil Procedure № 14/95). - SG, issue 68/95). The Constitutional Court held that, as the supreme legislative body for the Parliament, there were no constitutional obstacles in the State Budget Law for 2001 to determine the extra-budgetary accounts and funds for the same year. In addition, the Constitution presupposes a balance between public and local interests. It is within the powers of the National Assembly to achieve this balance by legislative order - Art. 62 and Art. 84, item 2 of the Basic Law. Therefore, the attacked norms are not unconstitutional. According to § 20According to this provision, when budget institutions financed from the state budget, municipal budgets or extrabudgetary funds are housed in buildings owned by the state or municipalities, they do not pay rent. The Constitutional Court held that the provision was not unconstitutional for the reasons set out in the decision in connection with Article 2, paragraph 8 of the LDBRB for 2001. Under § 22, paragraphs 2 and 3, according to the applicants, the two provisions contradicted Article 141, para. 1 of the Basic Law. According to them, the municipal budget is independent only if the municipality acts autonomously in all its phases - compilation, adoption, implementation and reporting. Indeed, paragraph 2 of § 22 provides for the municipal budget to be compiled on the basis of the budget forecast by the General Tax Directorate for the tax revenues under the municipal budget for 2001. It should be emphasized that the independence of municipal budgets does not exclude the possibility of appropriate participation of the competent executive bodies in the process of both drawing up and implementing municipal budgets (Decision № 2/2001 under cd № 10/2000). The above also applies to para 3, according to which the overfulfillment, resp. the non-fulfillment of the tax revenues for 2001 is at the expense of the republican budget. The legislator has complied with its obligation under Article 141, paragraph 3 of the Constitution to support municipalities, including through funds from the state budget. Under § 26According to this provision the relative share of the contribution made by the municipality under Article 9, paragraph 1 to each reporting period of the year may not be lower than the relative amount of the incurred budget expenditures, including the expenditures for investments and current repairs to the budget credits for the same period of the year and higher than the installment approved by this law. from the municipalities are an element of the budgetary relations between them and the state. These contributions are used exclusively to support weaker municipalities. The provision is fully in accordance with Article 20 and Article 141, paragraph 3 of the Basic Law, according to which the state creates conditions for balanced development of individual regions of the country, including through financial support to municipalities in a manner determined by law. § 30According to this legal text, the municipalities, whose budgetary relations with the republican budget for 2001 are a contribution, are provided with additional earmarked funds, if the contribution made by the municipality to the republican budget is in the amount corresponding to the part due for the respective period. Its Constitution is in accordance with Art. 141, para 3, obliging the state to financially support the municipalities, including through funds from the state budget. Under § 35, para 2C this provision practically provides the state with financial protection of certain social groups of the population, damaged during the totalitarian state. These are obligations of municipalities in relation to the owners of expropriated real estate and young people who worked in construction under the repealed Decree № 70 of the Council of Ministers of 1980. Therefore, the provision is in accordance with the principles of the rule of law - Article 4. , para 1 of the basic law. According to § 37According to this paragraph the funds approved by law for acquisition of fixed tangible assets and overhaul of the local municipal roads shall be distributed by municipalities by 30.03.2001 by an order determined by the Council of Ministers. The Constitutional Court in Decision № 2/2001 under c.d. № 10/2000 has explicitly stated that the independence of the municipal budget does not exclude the possibility of appropriate participation of the competent executive bodies in the process of drawing up and implementing municipal budgets. This is even more true for a government which, according to Art. para 1 of the basic law implements the domestic policy of the country. That is why the challenged provision does not contradict the Constitution.III. Regarding the compliance of the provisions of the Law on Local Self-Government for 2001 with the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECMS) According to ECMS, local self-government bodies have the right to sufficient own funds to dispose of freely, but within the national economic policy - Art. 9, item 1. The national economic policy of the Republic of Bulgaria is determined by the National Assembly and the government - art. 1, para 1 and art. 105, para 1 of the Constitution. Within its framework with the State Budget Law for 2001, the municipalities have been provided with sufficient free funds for their normal activity. On the other hand, with Article 9, item 5 of the ECMS it is insisted on protection of financially weaker local communities through appropriate financial procedures and measures. This requirement was also achieved by the Parliament when adopting the law on the state budget for 2001, as it is clear from the reasons under item II of the decision. That is why the attacked provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001 are in accordance with the EHMS. stated and on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, items 2 and 4 the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: 1. Rejects the request of 59 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly for declaring the unconstitutionality of the following provisions of the State Budget Law for 2001: 1, para 2 in the part under item 1.11.1., 5.1.1. and 5.2.1 .; Art. 2, para 1, item II, para 2, para 5 in the part regarding the word “overfulfillment” and para 8; Article 9, paragraphs 1 and 2; Article 10, paragraph 1; Article 11, paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 5; Art. 13, para 4 and 5 in the part regarding the words “the bodies of the judiciary”, “and the mayors”, “art. 2, para 2” and “art. 9, para 2”; § 9; § 20; § 22, para 2 and 3; § 26; § 30; § 35, para 2; § 37 of the transitional and final provisions and Annexes № 3 and № 4 of the same law.2. Rejects the request of the same MPs to establish the inconsistency of the provisions of the LDBDA for 2001 referred to in item 1 of the decision with the European Charter of Local Self-Government.