OPINION

of the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation
on constitutional case Xe 12/2001

formed at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria
to declare the provision unconstitutional
of Art. 53 para. | of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament

The Constitutional Court allowed the request to be considered on the merits
of the Prosecutor General of> the Republic of Bulgaria for the establishment of
the unconstitutionality of Art. 53 para. | of the Law on the Election of People's
representatives, which reads:

Art. 53. (1) During the election campaign the registered
candidates for MPs and advocates cannot be
detained and prosecuted except in cases of
a serious crime.

1. Regarding the compliance of art. 53 of ZINP with art. 6 of the Constitution

The request of the Chief Prosecutor of the Republic maintains that Article 53, paragraph 1
from ZINP provides to the candidates for MPs and theirs
advocates a privilege that contradicts the principle of equality of
citizens before the law enshrined in Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

ъ and ъ. pa za nstvo zabt
imitation and privileges under Art. 6 0: niation of the Republic of Bulgaria

The Basic Law explicitly defines (and restrictively) the powers of
state institutions and guarantees the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens.
The principle of constitutionalism is that with regard to rights provisions
of the Constitution can not be interpreted restrictively, and that no
prevents the content of the rights provided for therein from being extended by
law.

In its meaning, logical interpretation and systematic place, the text of Art. 6 from
The constitution guarantees citizens their equality, on the other hand
proclaims the obligation of the state to provide them with equal protection from
the law and equal guarantees for the exercise of their rights and freedoms; and
notwithstanding the differences referred to in the second paragraph of Art. 6. This principle
is the basis of the legal order of any democratic society.

 

to the UN! and and the European. convention.

In international human rights instruments, as well as in practice
in their application, the concepts of equality and discrimination consistently and
are invariably interpreted as prohibiting an unjustified difference in
the treatment of individuals, not as a prohibition of any difference. IN
the practice of the European Court of Human Rights under Art. 14 of the ECHR is
adopted the principle that a breach of the principle of equality and
discrimination occurs when: there is a different attitude towards the same
cases - without objective and reasonable justification, or if missing
proportionality between the objective pursued and the means employed.

3. Regarding the compliance of art. 53 para. | ZINP with the principle of
equal responsibility of citizens before the criminal law.

In essence, the request alleges that Art. 6 of the Constitution, requires
guarantees of equal opportunity for the exercise of the powers of
the bodies of the judiciary to all citizens, as well as the same
an obligation to bear criminal responsibility and to endure what was imposed on them
punishment determined in accordance with the same procedural order.

The interpretation of the content of Art. 6 as an obligation and not as a right,
means to accept that the Constitution does not provide equal and equal
guarantees for the rights of citizens and does not limit the powers
of the authorities, and vice versa - that it unconditionally guarantees the powers of
institutions and restrictively defines the rights of individuals.

Both the electoral law and other basic laws of Bulgaria
provide for a number of limitations on the powers of the institutions,
exercising criminal responsibility and balancing them with a view to protection
of other public interests and individual rights, creating temporary
or permanent legal exceptions to the principle of the same obligation.

Incorrect in the request is maintained that the exceptions to the principle that
"All citizens are equal before the law, including the criminal law
law ”are provided only in the Constitution and cannot be
created in other laws. In defense of other public interests and principles
of Justice PPC and Penal Code provide for well-known differences in
the realization of the responsibility of the citizens before the law, which are also not
explicitly provided for in the Constitution: not subject to criminal prosecution
minors and the insane, minors are liable before the law at
relaxed conditions, pending criminal proceedings against sudden and severe
sick people are stopped, etc. These "privileges" are undoubtedly created
namely with a view to protecting the public guaranteed by the basic law
interests and rights (as is the right to fair and free elections) and hardly
there is a dispute over their constitutionality.

At the same time, as far as the disputed and other texts of the ZINP
provide some additional rights during the election campaign,
guarantees and privileges of the candidates for Members of Parliament and theirs
advocates, in the light of the generally accepted interpretation of the concept
"privilege"? and “non-discrimination”, the legislator can justify
their different treatment with the need to ensure equal opportunity
for the exercise of their direct and equal suffrage and in defense of
the public interest in holding free and democratic elections.

For these reasons, the thesis that any unforeseen in the Constitution
exception, or a special guarantee against criminal prosecution
constitutes an unconstitutional privilege is unfounded, and created
art. 53 para. | from ZINP additional guarantees do not contradict the requirement
of Art. 6 for equality and non-discrimination.

P. As to whether the provision of Article 5 applies
echk: 0 establishment of criminal liability

The Prosecutor General's request further stated that “specific
expression of ... the most common? principle (of equality of citizens before
law) in the field of criminal law are the following provisions of
The Constitution:

a / All persons who have committed a crime are attracted to
criminal liability. / argument from art. 127, item 1 of the Constitution ”,
which reads: “The prosecutor's office monitors compliance with the law by attracting
to responsibility the persons who have committed a crime and maintains
the charge in criminal cases of a general nature. "

as well as the text of Art. ЗГал. | of the Constitution:

6 / “Everyone accused of a crime should be handed over to the judiciary
".. within the legally prescribed period" in order to seek criminal liability,
according to the order determined in the Code of Criminal Procedure ”.

First of all, we are not convinced of the admissibility of deriving
"Provisions of the Constitution" in the way of the argument, as well as its interpretation
from institutions other than the Constitutional Court. At the same time, we believe that
on the above considerations regarding the meaning and content of Art. 6,
the principle derived by the applicant 's argument does not correspond to the meaning of
The Constitution.

As Art. 6, as well as the cited text of art. 31 of the Constitution, are
created as guarantees for the rights of citizens against possible arbitrariness,
and not as a constitutional protection of the powers and obligations of the bodies
of the judiciary to carry out criminal proceedings. Art. 31 para. 1 /
it does not refer to the right but to the obligation of the authorities to extradite the arrested person
of a body of the judiciary to rule on the need for
his detention. The text is designed to protect the right to personal liberty and
security - as a guarantee of citizens against arbitrary, illegal or
unnecessary arrests and not to ensure in all cases the detention of
the accused.

However, the interim protection created by the contested text
candidates and their advocates does not release them from their liability to
the law and does not impede the ability of the prosecution to exercise
its powers in relation to the exercise of this responsibility.
The impugned text allows for the possibility of criminal proceedings
production in the presence of sufficient data, as well as the performance of
investigative actions during the election campaign. The provision
postpones by about one month the moment of the defendant's confrontation with
the judiciary to determine the need for his detention, or for
bringing him to criminal responsibility.

It is well known that outside the statute of limitations for prosecution of one
crime, the law does not provide a mandatory period in which the state

authorities should also prosecute a person with a view to
the usual time limits for the completion of preliminary proceedings in
country, the restriction period of about one month is unlikely to affect
significantly on the duration of criminal proceedings. Here
why, we consider that the request unreasonably states that “in practice this
an unconstitutional norm can seriously impede criminal punishment
prosecution of perpetrators of crimes, including serious ones
crimes ”.

For these reasons, we believe that the text of Art. 53 of the ZINP does not create.
permanent obstacles to the administration of justice, nor does it contradict
in any way the texts of the Constitution referred to in the request -
provided for in it explicitly, or based on arguments presented by the Prosecutor General.

1 tn: the lie of the state to ax! and conditions
guarantees for free and fair elections

As the norm of Art. 53 para. | of the ZINP, as well as other provisions of
the law aims to create not inadmissible privileges, but the necessary conditions
and institutional guarantees to protect the public interest from
the production of free and fair elections on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage
suffrage by secret ballot. " / чп.10/. In Decision Xe 8 of 3 May 2001
of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria under cd. On October 10, 2001, the Constitutional Court ruled that although
"The constitution (yes! Does not mention that elections should be free and
honest ... there is hardly any doubt that the last two requirements are internal
inherent qualities of general elections. "

The need for free and fair elections is
proclaimed in the main international documents - the Universal Declaration on
human rights (Article 21), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
rights (art. 25), the European Convention on Human Rights (art. 3 of
Additional Protocol). The text of the ECHR is explicitly worded as
positive obligation of the state. In its decision of 2 March 1987 in the case
Ma ei-Movsh apd Setzau, the European Court of Human Rights
stated that “the main obligation in this area is not to abstain or
non-interference, as in most civil and political rights, and for
taking positive measures by the state for
the production of democratic elections. "

The conclusion of the Constitutional Court in Decision Ho 8 of
May 3, 2001 under cd. G 10/2001: “... for the state it exists explicitly
obligation and not the right to produce or not to hold elections in that manner. " This
obligation includes the creation of conditions for the conduct of fair and
fair elections and the guarantee of fundamental rights proclaimed in itself.
constitution. The exercise of active and passive suffrage,
the right to freedom of expression during elections, the right to
information, the right to free association, etc. have real value only
in the presence of relevant guarantees, one of which is the disputed norm.

Art. 53 para. | is not the only additional and special guarantee for
the holding of fair and free elections provided for in the current legislation
legislation. The law on the election of MPs gives to
candidates for MPs the capacity of officials within the meaning
of the Penal Code, parties and candidates for MPs receive a special
privileged status in terms of their appearances in national and others
electronic media, an obligation is created for equal publication of
free response in case of infringement of the rights and good name of a candidate in
daily or periodical, etc. These rules are conditions and guarantees,
inherent and necessary for a free and democratic electoral process, c
which individual candidates receive the opportunity freely and without availability
of any pressure to participate, voters - the right to exercise
informed and free choice.

The temporary restriction created by the norm of Article 53 para 1 of the ZINP
prevents the possible use of the possibility of criminal
persecution and especially for the detention of candidates for Members of Parliament
for purposes other than those under the PPC. With it, the legislator creates a guarantee for
the non-interference of a state body - the prosecution - in the elections and
prevents the possibility for the judiciary to influence
elections by exercising their powers on a political basis.

In view of the powers of the judiciary in the existing
legislation, art. 53 para. | guarantees both applicants and
voters that none of the contestants will be
persecuted for political reasons or disadvantaged

the other participants - in contradiction with the requirements of the Constitution for
khan, tite and exhaustive restrictions on them.

According to Art. 65 para. | of the Constitution, ”for a Member of Parliament may
to elect a Bulgarian citizen who has no other citizenship,
he has reached the age of 21, has not been placed under guardianship and is not serving a sentence
imprisonment."

The text of Art. 65 cannot be interpreted broadly and not
provides for additional restrictions for suspected persons,
or criminal proceedings instituted. Moreover, since Art. 31 para. 4 of
The Constitution requires that “restrictions on the rights of
the accused in excess of what is necessary for the administration of justice ”,
taken together, the two texts should mean that even at the time of
the opening of the> election campaign to exist formed
criminal proceedings against persons registered as candidates for.
MPs, their detention or prosecution
liability would not be constitutional - if it goes beyond what is necessary
for the administration of justice.

Axis for equal rights of candidates.

It is common ground that, in the absence of the contested text, the rights of
possibly detained or prosecuted
candidates for MPs and their advocates would be
significantly limited and different from the rights and opportunities of others
candidates. Thus, the absence of the contested text would create
additionally - not provided for in the Constitution. restriction of the right of
Bulgarian citizens to be elected. Although it does not create an absolute
prohibition on the participation of the applicant or his representative, detention, or
bringing them to justice during the campaign, or
even the theoretical possibility of this can obviously be an obstacle to
equal exercise of the right to participate in elections.

It should not be forgotten that although all citizens respond equally
before the law, the current Code of Criminal Procedure does not contain
guarantees against the possible selective exercise of the powers of
the judicial authorities in instituting criminal proceedings; and
bringing to justice. In the conditions of elections, this possibility contains
and a theoretical risk of persecution of political opponents and unwanted
competitors through the means of criminal justice. This risk should
be avoided in order to ensure genuinely equal participation of
representatives of various political formations and independent candidates in
elections.

Nedo: acceptable participation of the bodies of the judiciary in the elections

The possibility of detention and prosecution
also contains a risk of inadmissible participation of the judiciary in
elections that would run counter to the principle of separation of powers,
as well as the requirement for non - interference of the acting authorities in
the election of a legislature. To ensure the effective separation of
authorities and their mutual balancing, during free elections for
the legislature, the democratic state owes its citizens
freedom from pressure and influence from both the executive and
by the judiciary. Although not specified in the Constitution, this
requirement stems from the principles of free choice and the obligation of
the state to create conditions for them.

Guarantees for the free will of the voters

Free elections mean an authentic correspondence between the will of
voters and election results, which implies freedom from
any pressure that could change the will of the voter.
The text is also designed to ensure the expression of freedom and influence
opinion and will of both the candidates and their advocates and
the voters themselves.

It is indisputable that the detention, or attracting a candidate for the People's
representative to criminal liability during the election
campaign, may form Wu voter negative opinion, which is not
must comply with any future and final decision
of the court, which alone rules on the guilt of the accused.
This would run counter to the requirement of freedom from unjustified negativity
formation of the will of the voter through the means of the penal
justice, as well as the requirement to express candidates without fear of
repression.

At the same time, by its social effect the retention of candidates and
their prosecution would go beyond exhaustively
the restrictions on eligibility listed in the Constitution, which do not include
all "accused of crimes", but only "punishable" persons.

Conclusion

Undoubtedly, the request of the Prosecutor General raises the issue of
the necessary balance between the public interest in prosecuting
all perpetrators of crimes and the fundamental interest of
democratic society from the periodic conduct of fair and free
elections.

We consider that the disputed text of Art. 53 para. | of the Law on the Election of
MPs regulate precisely this balance, on the one hand
does not block the path to the administration of justice, but on the other hand guards in
the necessary degree of the rights and freedoms provided for in the Constitution
citizens by creating conditions for fair and free elections.