OPINION

OF THE SUPREME COURT OF CASSATION
ON CONSTITUTIONAL CASE F 12/2001

DEAR PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In view of our constitution as an interested party and
given the opportunity to comment on the request of the Chief
prosecutor for establishing the unconstitutionality of art. 53, para from
The Law on the Election of Members of Parliament expresses the following
position:

The provision of art. 53, para of the Law on the Election of People's
representatives / SG, issue 37 of April 13, 2001 / is unconstitutional
for the following reasons:

1. The equality of all citizens before the law is
a constitutional principle that underlies the civil
society and the state. It is common to the whole legal system and
at the same time, it is a fundamental right of citizens.

The equality of the citizens before the law in the sense of art. B, para 2
of the Constitution means equality before all normative acts,
including before the criminal law.

Anyone who has committed a crime is attracted to
responsibility / art. 127 of the Constitution /.

Anyone charged with a crime should be handed over to
the judiciary within the legally determined term / art. 31 of the Constitution /.

2. Exceptions to the principle of equality of citizens before
the law is allowed at the constitutional level only on the basis of
specifically and exhaustively indicated features, different from those under Art. 6,
para 2 of the Constitution.

According to Article 69 of the Constitution, MPs do not
are criminally liable for the opinions expressed by them and for
the votes in the National Assembly, and according to Article 70 they cannot be
detained and no criminal prosecution may be instituted against them
except for serious crimes after prior permission from the People's
assembly or its chairman. With the immunity of the people
representatives are used according to Article 132 of the Constitution by judges,
prosecutors and investigators, and according to Article 103, paragraph 1, the President and
the Vice - President shall not be liable for acts performed under

performance of its functions, with the exception of treason and
violation of the Constitution.

It is inadmissible by law to provide them to individual groups
citizens certain privileges.

The admission on the grounds specified in Art. 6, para? from
The Constitution social signs or of others not specified in it
signs, “privileges for registered candidates for popular
representatives and their advocates during the election campaign,
is a violation of the principle of equality of all citizens before the law.

3. Suffrage is a political right. It is basic
regulated in the Constitution. Article 10 sets out the principles for
its exercise Article 42 specifies the conditions for
exercise of the active suffrage, and in art. 65 and 93 - the conditions for
exercising the passive suffrage for Members of Parliament,
president and vice president. It is inadmissible by law to limit them
or expand in the exercise of passive suffrage.

Only the organization and the order for are determined by law
conducting the election.

The status of citizens exercising actively and passively
suffrage is determined by the Constitution, which does not allow
restrictions or privileges in the rights of this category of citizens at
exercising their right to vote.

4. The provision of art. 53, para ZINP is not public
necessary for the free exercise of passive voting
right.

Compliance with regulations is a basic obligation of
all legal entities. The opposite understanding is absurd. Republic
Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law. It is governed by the Constitution and
the laws in the country / art. 4, para. of the Constitution / Regarding
suffrage the principle of legality is specified in
the provision of Article 167 of the Criminal Code, which provides
criminal liability for infringements of suffrage.