OPINION

by Emanuil Yordanov - Minister of Interior,
constituted as an interested party by definition
of 29 March 2001 in constitutional case Xe 7/2001

SUBJECT: Request of a group (54) of MPs from the 38th
National Assembly to establish entirely on
the unconstitutionality of the Amendment Act and
supplement to the Law on Access to Documents of the former
State security, or alternatively to establish
the unconstitutionality of 8 6, 5 7, art.4-d, art.4-e, 53, art.2,
85, art. 3, para 1, items 1,58, 821, 823 and 25 of the same law.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Pursuant to the definition provided to me by 29
March 2001 on constitutional case ХЬ 7/2001 possibility, as

interested party to make known its views in writing on the request for
establishing the unconstitutionality of the Law on
amendment of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former
State Security (AIS ZDDBDS, promulgated SG, issue 24 of 13.03.2001) or
alternatively to establish the unconstitutionality of 8 6, 8 7, art.4-
d, art.4-e, 83, art.2, 8 5, art.3, para.1, items 1, 8 8, 8 21, 823 and 8 25 of the same law,
made by a group (54) MPs from the 38th National
meeting and within the specified period I present the present. I find
the arguments and arguments in the request of the group of MPs for
unfounded for the following reasons, set out in the order of
requests:

1. Regarding the contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of Art.
Article 87, paragraph | and Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

I consider that the presented arguments for contradiction of the Amendments and Supplements
ZDDBDS with art. 4, para 1, art. 87, para. and Article 88, para! of the Constitution are
unfounded. This is because the applicants themselves accept that the law is
adopted in two readings, but challenged the constitutional authority of
MPs in the course of the legislative process to be able to
make changes to the bill.

At the same time, there is no constitutional requirement, and it would be
it was also absurd for the submitted bill to be adopted in the form in which it was
has entered. The National Assembly is the legislature, not
the submitter of the bill. It is his right and responsibility, with
law to fully regulate all major public relations
subject to a permanent system in the matter to which it relates. Absolutely
it is natural, democratic, and constitutionally imported
bills to be amended in the process of their
discussion in order to be able to meet the requirement for
completeness of the regulation of the respective matter to which it refers.

For these reasons, I find that there is no violation of
the legislative process, ie the constitutional requirement has not been violated,
enshrined in Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and the law was discussed and adopted on
two votes.

2. Regarding the contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of
The Constitution.

The statement is too general and not specified, but
the considerations set out by the applicants are primarily political,
and not of a legal nature. It is for this reason that it is difficult to point out
legal arguments (counter-arguments), much less to make legal ones

conclusions. I find this statement unfounded in the following
considerations:

Under letter "a" I do not share the statement that the commission under art. 4,
para 1 of the VAT Act will not be an impartial body, but a political one
such. The thesis of bias and bias of the members of this
commission is suggested by the applicants, fearing that
the majority in the National Assembly shall appoint the five members from among its members
circles, and the Council of Ministers, which is elected by this majority, will
appoint the other two members. The fact that for members of
the commission also elected persons from other parliamentary groups, as well as
the signing of an oath declaration according to art. 46, para 2 of the VAT Act by
the members of the commission are an indisputable guarantee of the objectivity of
the work of the commission On the other hand - the fact that
the legislator has provided for the commission to include persons
proposed by the National Assembly and the Council of Ministers, on their own
essence does not contradict the constitution. The right cannot be denied
of the National Assembly, nor can it be obliged what persons to
proposed as members of the commission. However, as mentioned above,
the members of the commission from the quota of the National Assembly are proposed
from different parliamentary groups.

The argument under point (6) is also unfounded. The way of
determination of the composition of the commission under art. 4d, para of the VAT Act is a matter of
legislative assessment of expediency and inherently not
contradicts any text of the Constitution, and is entirely in
the powers of the National Assembly. The arguments set out by
applicants may be relevant in the assessment of appropriateness,
but not for constitutionality. In this case, these circumstances are
irrelevant.

I do not consider it within my power to interpret the reasons
due to which the National Assembly has taken this decision. On each
the prevailing view is that the judiciary is independent,
protects the rights and legitimate interests of citizens, legal
persons and the state, and in the performance of their functions the judges and
the prosecutors obey only the law - an argument from art. 117, para. | and2
of the Constitution, as well as the consideration that the president embodies
unity of the nation - art. 92, para of the Constitution.

Judgments, whether the president, the attorney general or
the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation sympathizes with one or
other political force, are not legal and are irrelevant to the raised
dispute.

That is why I believe that the provision of Article 4d of the VAT Act does not
contradicts Article 8 of the Constitution, nor any other
constitutional norm.

The foregoing applies in its entirety to the arguments put forward by
letter "c" of the request, and the judgments made that created on
Pursuant to Article 4e of the VAT Act, working groups “will implement party groups
orders ”will make a subjective assessment and only“ naive people ”will
they have the illusion that the objective truth will be proclaimed, they are unfounded.

It is logical, and the legal logic is reproduced in the amended ones
and amended provisions of the VAT Act, such working groups to be established
in the respective departments, where the respective ones are> stored
information funds. In this regard, it should be borne in mind that
it concerns a legally defined assessment of specific official documents,
explicitly referred to in Article 5 of the VAT Act, which have their legal
certain material and formal probative force with respect to
of the circumstances to which they relate, and not to free interpretation
of these circumstances by expressing opinions or statements of
various people, publications in the media and others
similar. It should be borne in mind that the members of these working groups
will be primarily civil servants who according to
the provision of Article 4 of the Civil Servant Act must be, a
and are politically neutral, as in the performance of their service
govern by law and lawful acts of the bodies of
state power and the observance and protection of the rights, the legal ones
interests and freedoms of citizens.

Summarizing the wording of point 2 of the request for
declaring the contradiction of the Amendments to the Constitution to the Constitution, may
to conclude that arguments and arguments are given that rather
aim at derogating from the provisions of Article 67, paragraph and Art. 81, al! i2 from
Constitution than establishing the unconstitutionality of
the provisions of the AIS ZDDBDS

3. Regarding the contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of Art.
Article 32, paragraph 2, Article 38 and Article 56 of the Constitution.

I consider that the considerations set out are unfounded. By
these issues have already been referred to the Constitutional Court and ruled
with decision Xe 10 / 22.1X.1997 on constitutional case Xe 14/1997, which
I fully share.

 

4. Concerning the contradiction of 8 2 of the Additional
provisions of the VAT Act with Article 6 of the Constitution.

The argument that they are limited by that provision
the constitutionally guaranteed rights of citizens to be elected
or appointed to certain positions in the state is insolvent.
The Constitution in a number of its provisions - art. 68, para 1, art. 93, para 2, art. 110 and
others - explicitly provides by law to regulate activities that
are incompatible with the position of Member of Parliament, President,
Prime Minister, Minister, etc. Therefore, the constitution does not
absolutizes the rights of citizens, but on the contrary empowers
The National Assembly may by law provide for election or
appointing the persons who will best meet
the requirements for the respective position. What exactly are the criteria for borrowing
of the relevant position will establish the National Assembly is a matter of
assessment of expediency, which is provided by the Constitution
exclusively at the National Assembly itself. In this sense, I find for
the argument put forward by the applicants is irrelevant to the dispute.

5. Regarding the orientation of the AIS ZDDBDS against
“The national and state unity of Bulgaria” and the “national
security and statehood ”.

The applicants substantiate this claim with a non-legal,
philosophical exposition of his thesis and use assumptions about
the application of the VAT Act, on which it is impossible to present legal ones
counter-arguments. As far as there is a contradiction with two constitutional ones
provisions - Article 1 and Article 9, it should be borne in mind that the way in which
The National Assembly has regulated the matter with the Amendments and Supplements to the Law on Public Procurement, no
also contradicts these provisions of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria.

In view of the above, please disregard
made by a group (54) MPs from the 38th National
assembly requests to establish the full unconstitutionality
of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents
of the former State Security (AAS ZDDBDS, promulgated SG, issue 24 of
13.03.2001) or alternatively to establish unconstitutionality
of 8 6, 57, art. 4-d, art. 4-e, 83, art. 2, 8 5, art. 3, para. 1, items 1, 88, 8215-5423 and 25 of
the same law. -