OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on
constitutional case Mo 2 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of 13 February 2001
we are constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case
Mo 2 for 2001, formed at the request of a group of MPs from
38th National Assembly for establishing the unconstitutionality
of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic
Bulgaria (Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of the FRBA). It's up to the case
joined the request of the panel of the Third Division of
The Supreme Administrative Court in constitutional case Mo 4 for 2001,
whose subject is the same.

The request of the group of MPs states that
The law for> interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA was> entirely
unconstitutional as they were unconstitutional as
its only article and "the only paragraph of its
final provision. The arguments with which the MPs
substantiate their allegations of unconstitutionality, are divided
in two groups - on the unconstitutionality of the Law on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA as an interpretative law, and regarding

the unconstitutionality of all texts in the law - article
single and paragraph only.

The opinion of the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court, although expressed in the request in the form of
questions to the Constitutional Court, as well as the arguments in support of this
opinion are largely analogous to those in the group's request
MPs, in some parts even literally it
reproduce, so they do not need to be commented on

separately.

1. Regarding the allegations of unconstitutionality of
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA as an interpretative law

According to the> group of people's> representatives principles and
the provisions of art. 8, Art. 117, para. 2, Art. 124 and Art. 125, para. 1 of
The Constitution excluded the possibility for the National Assembly to give
authentic interpretation of its legislation. This is yours
allegation they substantiate on the one hand with the argument that the possibility of
the legislator himself to interpret the laws led inevitably to “at least
two possibilities hostile to our constitutionalism -
compromising legal certainty by substituting the will of
the parliamentary majority with retroactive effect of one
next parliament, and on the other, with the argument that the National Assembly does not
the right to interpret laws, as the Constitution mandates this
activity of the courts.

The argument that in interpreting the law legal certainty is
compromised by substituting the will of the parliamentary
a retroactive majority of the next Parliament, is
completely> insolvent. The Constitution does not link laws with
the parliamentary majority by which they were adopted, nor solely by
The National Assembly, in whose mandate they were adopted. Every People's
Assembly has full constitutional authority to
adopts, amends, supplements and repeals laws, and after the Constitution
does not limit it in the content of the laws, this includes the law

to adopt interpretative laws as well. Moreover, in this case the 38th

The National Assembly has adopted an interpretative law on a text by the FRBA, which
was also adopted by the 38th National Assembly.

The argument of the group of people cannot be supported either
representatives, which is also shared by the composition of the Third Department of
The Supreme Administrative Court that after Art. 84, item 1 of
The Constitution authorizes the National Assembly to adopt, amend,
supplements and repeals the laws, it has no right to interpret them. The authentic
interpretation is an activity inherent in any body that receives or issues
regulations. Indisputable right of the body that issued or adopted the act,
is to issue or adopt another act clarifying the meaning attached to
the act and his will expressed in the act. The lack of explicit regulation is not
prohibition of authentic interpretation. On the contrary, it would be an explicit regulation
necessary only if a body other than the body which issued or adopted the act is
authorized to interpret it as it was in the action of the annulled
Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria of 1971, according to which the State
council interpreted laws passed by the National Assembly. In that
the interpretation of a law is also made by a law (which derives from
the need for “the interpreted and the interpretative act to> be
equal in terms of the hierarchy of regulations)
and in this sense to authorize the National Assembly to accept
laws under Art. 84, item 1 of the Constitution also includes authorization for
adoption of interpretative laws.

The Group of MPs and the composition of the Third Department of
The Supreme Administrative Court substantiated its claim for
constitutional prohibition for the National Assembly to interpret the laws and with
the argument that the clarification by action egg otpez of the exact meaning of
legal norms is a judicial function inherent in
judicial authorities, which stemmed from the powers of the
The Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court yes
exercise supreme judicial oversight for accurate and uniform application
of laws - art. 124 Art. 125, para. 1 of the Constitution.

It is indisputable that any person when considering his behavior with
the law, as well as any body to which the implementation is assigned or

application of the law, interpret it to clarify the meaning attached to

him. However, the interpretation of the law enforcement body cannot be interpreted
opposes or replaces or excludes the authentic interpretation
of the law by the body that adopted it. The courts when
administer justice, interpret the law and the binding force of theirs
judicial acts shall extend to the persons referred to in
procedural laws. In this sense, the interpretation of the courts in
their judicial activity is inherently an interpretation,
what every state body does in the application of the law, with this
difference that on the basis of its interpretation the court rules acts with
binding force specified in the procedural laws. As far as
the interpretation of the law that the court makes when considering
disputes is contained in the grounds of the judicial act and not in the operative part,
its binding force is even more limited. On the other hand,
the empowerment of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Court
administrative court to adopt interpretative decisions and to give
mandatory instructions of the courts, also can not replace or yes
exclude the authentic interpretation of the body which adopted the act. The instructions of
The Supreme Court of Cassation on the interpretation and application of
substantive law are binding on the court to which the case has been returned
(Article 218h of the Code of Civil Procedure), interpretative decisions
of the Supreme Court of Cassation and of the Supreme Administrative Court are
obligatory for the bodies of the judiciary and the executive power (art.
86, para. 2 and Art. 97, para 2 of the Judiciary Act - JSA, Art. 45 from
The Law on the Supreme Administrative Court - ZVAS). Theirs
binding force does not extend to the legislature and the
In practice, it manifests itself only in court proceedings at and under
occasion of a lawsuit. This proves once again that
the interpretation of the courts cannot displace or exclude
the authentic interpretation of the authority which adopted or issued the act since
the binding force of the acts of the bodies of the judiciary, p
which is interpreted by law does not extend to all state
bodies, organizations and citizens, as is the case with the mandatory
force of the laws and the decisions of the National Assembly (art. 86, para 2 of

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria). There is no conclusion in another sense and

of Art. 124 and Art. 125, para. 1 of the Constitution. The purpose of the provided in
The Constitution is the supreme judicial supervision for accurate and uniform application
of the laws is to ensure equality and justice in
litigation, not to replace or replace the authentic
interpretation of regulations. This is clear from both
constitutional texts that do not bind the powers of the supreme
courts with the correct and uniform application of the laws always and by all
- the powers of the Supreme Court of Cassation under Art. 124 refer to
the application of the law by the courts, the powers of the Supreme
administrative court under Art. 125, para. 1 relate to the application of
laws in administrative justice.

It is not clear what argument the MPs draw from
the reasons for the bill, and in particular the reference in the reasons
of the contradictory and contradictory case law.
The existence of legislation aimed at eliminating
the contradictory case law on the application of a normative act,
does not preclude the right of the authority which adopted or issued the act to intervene as
amend, supplement or interpret the act in such a way as to achieve its purpose
and to clarify the indisputable and binding for all, not just for
the bodies of the judiciary and the executive way the will of the body and
meaning attached to the act. As stated, the authentic interpretation
it has nothing to do with the interpretation of the implementing authorities
regulations and can not be argued that with the authentic
interpretation of the law takes away the powers of the supreme courts
to make interpretative decisions to ensure accurate and
equal application of the law in the administration of justice.

We find no reason to comment on the allegations about
unconstitutionality of art. 47 and Art. 51 of the Normatives Act
acts (LNA), as we are not aware of an incidental procedure
declaration of unconstitutionality, without an explicit request in such
meaning. It is common ground that Article 47 of the LNA cannot be applied to
the operation of the 1991 Constitution, but Art. 51 is an effective norm,
which has not been declared unconstitutional and in our opinion cannot

shall be deemed to have been repealed by virtue of the direct effect of the Constitution (5

3, para. 1 of its Transitional and Final Provisions). I will not
we also comment on the allegation of the contradiction between the Law on
interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA and the LNA, as a contradiction between the two
the law cannot justify unconstitutionality.

Finally, all in connection with the powers of the National Assembly
to give an authentic interpretation, account should be taken of what is stated in
the reasons for Decision Mo 3 of 1992 of the Constitutional Court of
Republic of Bulgaria, ruled on constitutional case Me 30 for 1991
in which it is said:

"The right to give to the National Assembly cannot be denied
obligatory (authentic) interpretation of constitutional norms. But this
it can take place only under the conditions and in the order under which the People's
Assembly amends and supplements the provisions of the Constitution insofar as
it does not envisage this to be done by the Grand National Assembly (Art.
153 et seq. Of the Constitution). ”

After the Constitutional Court has ruled that the National Assembly
can give an authentic interpretation of constitutional norms by law,
accepted under the conditions and by the order of art. 153 et seq. Of the Constitution, then p
the National Assembly can give an even greater reason authentically
interpretation of laws with a law adopted under the conditions and by the order of art. 84,
t. Tichl. 87 and 88 of the Constitution.

2. On the unconstitutionality of the individual texts
in the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA

(a) a single member

According to the group of MPs and according to the composition of the Third
department of the Supreme Administrative Court sentence one of the article
the only one of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA contained new ones
material and procedural norms, which contradicted Art. 4, para. 1,
Art. 5, para. 5, Art. Article 27 56 of the Constitution.

Both requests contain only allegations of contradiction with
Art. 4, para. 1, respectively Art. 4, Art. Article 27 56 of the Constitution without
point to any arguments in support of these allegations.

Nevertheless, we believe that there is no contradiction with the Constitution.

There is no prohibition in the interpretative law to contain others
substantive or procedural rules. The assessment of
the constitutionality of these norms should be done no
only with a view to their inclusion in an interpretative law, but with a view to
their retroactive effect, which Every interpretative law has, and
the conformity of the regulation thus created with the Constitution. IN
In this case, the regulation thus created does not affect fundamental rights and others
constitutional values, nor does it contradict constitutional texts
and this is not stated in the requests either. In doing so, the determination of the listed
in the text orders as subject to immediate execution and as
not subject to appeal are not new substantive and
procedural rules, as the non-appealability arises from Art.
47, para. 1 of the FRBA, and the immediate implementation is a legal consequence of
the non-appealability and, accordingly, the lack of a statutory deadline
for the entry into force of these orders.

The claims allege that the second sentence of the sole article of
The Law on Interpretation of the FRBA contradicts Art. 4, para. 1, art. 8, Art. 117,
al. 2 and Art. 121, para. 2 of the Constitution according to the group of people
representatives, respectively of Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution according to
the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court.

The arguments of the group of MPs and most of all strange
example by which they substantiate their claim, in our opinion point to
misunderstanding of the text. The second sentence of the sole article applies
only until the assessment of whether an administrative act is
directly related to the security of the country, which by virtue of
the law excludes the judicial appeal of the act, and not to the whole
assessment of the act, including the competence of the body that issued it
has issued. In all likelihood, MPs did not understand
that an order issued by a body not specified in the FRBA is not in the category of
the orders listed in the Law for interpretation of art. 47, para. 1 of the FRBA, as
as they are issued only by the bodies authorized for this by law.

The statement of the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court for contradiction with art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution
also cannot be shared. The non-appealability of the acts, p

which impose coercive administrative measures under the FRBA,
directly related to the security of the country, does not arise from
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA, and from Art. 47 of the FRBA, which is not
subject of this constitutional case. Nevertheless, it should be
has in mind in Decision Mo 5 of the Constitutional Court of 1997 on
constitutional case Mo 25 for 1996 states that “... the legislator
may establish exceptions to the court procedure for appealing to
administrative acts only when this exception does not
infringes on the constitutionally recognized fundamental rights and freedoms of
citizens, or when another, higher, but explicitly constitutional
declared value must be protected as a matter of priority (that is
for example, in the field of national security) ”.

At the request of the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme
administrative court also contains a statement of contradiction of
sentence two of the only article with art. 6, para. 1 of the Convention on
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Because, however, no
made a request to declare non-compliance with the law with
international treaty to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party, which is
hypothesis separate from the declaration of unconstitutionality - Art. 149,
al. 1, item 2 it. 4 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court justifiably does not
has allowed the discussion of the request in this part.

Sentence three of the only article of the Law on Interpretation of Art.
47 of the LARB is disputed by the group of MPs and the composition
of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court as
contrary to Art. Article 8 117, para. 2 of the Constitution, respectively of
Art. 120, para. You art. 121, para. You 2 of the Constitution, as with him
gave instructions to the courts on how to decide cases. We do not share
this statement in the claims. The indication in the law of legal
the grounds on which the appeals are dismissed,
there is no nature of instructing the courts on how to decide
cases. This is because the idea of ​​the law is that in the concrete
cases there can be no litigation for the court to consider and yes
decides and in which the legislator to intervene in contradiction with

The Constitution, giving instructions on the merits of the dispute. in

in the specific case, the law creates a prescription by way of interpretation
for the conduct of the courts in the hypotheses specified in the interpreted law.
Perception to the contrary would lead to a challenge to
the constitutionality of all texts in the procedural ones
laws prescribing the actions of the court in the specified in
law hypotheses.

The fourth sentence of the sole article is disputed as
contrary to Art. 121, para. 2 of the Constitution according to the group
MPs, respectively of Art. 120, para. 1, art. 121, para. 1i2
according to the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court.
All these constitutional texts regulate a matter related
only with court proceedings. In that sense, they are
irrelevant to the texts of the law, as, as already stated,
ichl. 47 of the FRBA, and the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA are excluded
legal proceedings in respect of orders relating
directly with the security of the country.

According to the group of MPs> the most drastic
discrepancy is contained in the fourth and fifth sentences (for each
probability only sentence five is meant) because it was thwarted
not only the right to appeal, but also the power of the prosecution to
protests administrative acts. According to them, the power of
the prosecution under Art. 127, т. 3 от The Constitution to monitor compliance
of legality by taking action to repeal
illegal acts, did not tolerate the restriction under Art. 120, para. 2 of
The Constitution. A statement to that effect is missing from the panel's request
of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court.

We believe that the power of the prosecution to protest
administrative acts suffer even more restrictions than
the right of appeal of the persons affected by the act. The control of legality,
assigned to the prosecution with art. 127, item 3, does not mean unconditionally and
unlimited power to challenge everyone in court
administrative acts. There is no authoritative text in the Constitution
the prosecution to challenge in court all administrative acts,
while Art. 120, para. 2 explicitly proclaims the right of citizens and

legal entities to appeal all administrative acts that
affect them, except as expressly provided by law. This means that
the active legitimacy of the prosecution as a party to the judiciary
proceedings may arise only from an express procedural rule in
law, but not from the general authorization for control of legality under Art. 127,
item 3 of the Constitution. In this sense is Art. 119, para. 5 of JSA, according to
which the prosecutor protests and seeks the annulment or amendment of
illegal acts within the term and by the order, provided in the law. Neither
The Law on Administrative Procedure (ZAP) and ZVAS do not
unlimited or even more powers of the prosecution to
disputes administrative acts than the persons affected by
these acts. This also follows from Art. 34 of the Administrative Procedure Act, which excludes
the appeal in court of certain categories of administrative
acts (and the appeal includes the filing of a protest), this follows and
otchl. 20, para. 1 of ZVAS.

Also according to the group of MPs nowhere in
The Constitution does not give any authority the power to
excluded the power of the court to exercise control over legality under
Art. 120, para. 1 of the Constitution. We will not comment on the solvency
of such a statement, we will only note that the court implements
control of legality and provide judicial protection of the rights and
the legitimate interests of citizens, legal entities and the state under
their request, and not ex officio, by self-referral on their own initiative.
Therefore, with the exclusion of citizens' law and legal
persons to appeal a certain category of administrative acts of
In practice, the Constitution allows for the exclusion of judicial control over.
these acts. This is also evident from the used wording of Art. 120, para. 1,
according to which the courts exercise control over the legality of
acts and actions (and not of acts and actions) of the administrative
organs.

Sentence six of the only article of the Law on Interpretation of Art.
47 of the FRBA is disputed as contradictory to Art. 8 and Art. 117, para. 2 of
The Constitution, according to the group of MPs, respectively of Art.

4, para. Tichl. 117 according to the composition of the Third Division of the Supreme

Administrative Court. Both claims allege that the assessment of
the nullity of judicial acts was made in the judicial system and that
the annulment by law of the decisions already rendered
closed cases ”compromised legal certainty and legality
of the state in general ”.

This claim also cannot be supported. The legal one
the text does not declare the nullity of specific judicial acts, but
determines the hypothesis of nullity of an indefinite number of judicial acts and
it is formulated in the abstract, like any legal norm. In this regard
account should be taken of what is stated in the grounds of Decision Mo 2 of
1994 of the> Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria under
Constitutional Case Mo 2 of 1994, which states:

"The argument that the Supplementary Act must also be rejected
of the Law on Supplementing the Civil Procedure Code
referred to two specific cases and was created for them. The law is
formulated abstractly. Whether or not it is unconstitutional is not

depends on the number of cases to which it will apply. "

6) single paragraph - Final provision

In the requests of the group of MPs and the composition of
Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court allegedly
paragraph only was unconstitutional because it attached
retroactive force of law.

According to Art. 5, para. 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria
the normative acts shall enter into force three days after their promulgation,
unless otherwise specified in them. According to MPs
the term was a future certain event, which meant that the entry into
force could take effect at the earliest at the time of promulgation of the act.
Also, according to them, this led to the unconstitutionality of Art. 14,
al. 1 of the LNA, which provided for the possibility of giving the opposite
force of a normative act as an exception and with an explicit norm.

We will not comment on the allegations of unconstitutionality
of Art. 14, para. 1 of the LNA, as this is not the subject of the request.

Indeed, the deadline is in the category of certain events, but it is not

means that it is only future and that as a term it cannot be
determined a past moment. In this sense, we do not consider that Art. 5, para. 5
of the Constitution excludes the possibility of retroactive effect
of the normative act and that the text giving retroactive force to the act is more
home unconstitutional. On the contrary, it would be such only if in
as a result of the retroactive effect of the act are violated basic
constitutional rights and values ​​or another contradiction arises with
The Constitution. In the present case, there is no such violation either
contradicts and this is not claimed by the group of people either
representatives, nor from the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
Administrative Court. Argument on the admissibility of retroactive force
of the normative act also follows from art. 5, para. 3 of the Constitution. This one
constitutional text excludes the possibility of giving the opposite
force in a particular case, which would be superfluous if the Constitution
did not allow the retroactive effect of the normative act at all. In this regard
account should also be taken of what is stated in the statement of reasons in Decision Me 18 of
1997 of the Constitutional Court in constitutional case Ko 12 for 1997,
which states:

"In principle, the Constitution does not exclude the right of the People's
assembly to adopt norms retroactively. Such an exception is explicit
is stipulated in Art. 5, para. 3 of the Constitution, but obviously not
there is a general ban on other cases. "

In view of the above, we consider that the demands of the group
MPs and the composition of the Third Department of the Supreme
administrative court to declare unconstitutional
The Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic

Bulgaria are unfounded and should be rejected.