OPINION
from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria
on

constitutional case Me 12 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,
DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

As of May 3, 2001, we have been constituted as
an interested party in the constitutional case Mo 12 for 2001,
formed at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria for
establishing the unconstitutionality of Art. 53, para. 1 of the Law on
election of MPs (ZINP).

The request states that Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP, according to which under
during the election campaign the registered candidates for the people
representatives and advocates may not be detained and
brought to criminal responsibility except in the cases of found
serious crime, contrary to the constitutional principle of
equality of citizens - Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria. It is maintained that the Constitution determines not only the basic
principle of equality of citizens, and all exceptions to it in
the field of criminal law.

The clarification of the compliance of art. 53, para. 1 of ZINP s
The Constitution as follows from the request of the Prosecutor General,
In our opinion, two main questions need to be answered:

- whether Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP creates privileges for individuals
citizens based on any of the social features specified in Art. 6,
al. 2 of the Constitution;

- whether the Constitution, regulating restrictions in criminal
liability of persons holding certain positions (Art. 69 and Art. 70,
Art. 103, para. Ti4 ichl. 132, para. 1) excludes the possibility of such a regulation
in respect of other persons to be contained in law.

As stated in the grounds of Decision Mo 14 of
The 1992 Constitutional Court in Constitutional Case No. 14 of 1992,
equality before the law means equality of all citizens
before the normative acts and obligation for their equal treatment by
state power. Article 6, para. 2 of the Constitution prohibits them to be
restrict rights or create privileges based on
race, nationality, ethnicity, sex, origin, religion,
education, “beliefs, political affiliation, personal and
social status or property status. According to the same
decision of the Constitutional Court social signs of non-admission
restrictions on the rights or granting of privileges referred to in Art.
6, para. 2 are listed exhaustively.

It is not clear from the request which of the social features under Art. 6,
al. 2 is the basis of the privilege under Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP according to
the Attorney General. In our opinion, the special status of the registered persons
for participation in the elections as candidates for Members of Parliament and of
their advocates is not a privilege of a separate group of citizens,
based on some of those specified in Art. b, para. 2 of the Social Constitution
signs, but is a privilege established to ensure freedom
exercising the active and passive suffrage. Status of
candidate for MP can acquire anyone who
meets the conditions under Art. 65, para. 1 of the Constitution and is registered
for participation in the elections as a candidate for Member of Parliament. Status of
an advocate can also be acquired by any citizen who registers
under the conditions and by the order, provided in ZINP. Candidate status for
MP or his representative does not require the presence of

a certain social attribute specified in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution,
nor is it characterized by such a feature.

There is no constitutional prohibition on restricting rights or on
granting privileges on grounds other than exhaustive
listed in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. In the reasons of the quoted
a decision of the Constitutional Court states:

"It is one of these and other cases explicitly mentioned in the Constitution
It is clear that restrictions on the rights and granting of privileges to
certain social groups is permissible under the Constitution. Must
emphasize, however, that in all these cases it is a question of
socially necessary restrictions on the rights or granting of
privileges of certain groups of citizens while maintaining the priority of
the principle of equality of all citizens before the law. Exactly and
comprehensive indication of the social characteristics which are the basis for
preventing restrictions on rights and granting privileges, f
guarantee against unjustified extension of the grounds for admission
restrictions on citizens' rights or privileges. "

It is indisputable that in the specific case the regulation in art. 53, para. 1 of
ZINP is socially necessary. It is a guarantee of freedom
exercise of active and passive suffrage.
The election campaign lasts 30 days (Article 54 of the Law on Public Procurement) and with a view to
the provision of art. 64, para. 3 of the Constitution this period can not
be arbitrarily extended by the legislator. Candidates for popular
representatives and their advocates have the opportunity to prepare
their participation in the elections and to conduct election campaigning only in
this period and within it they do not have the necessary time
to defend themselves against an unfounded> accusation.
Initiation of criminal proceedings or detention of
a candidate for a Member of Parliament or his / her deputy will be harmed by
irreparable way their rights as it may frustrate their participation
in the election, to impede the election of the candidate and to influence
election results, discrediting voters as well
the candidate for MP, and the political force that

he represents. Even after that, the criminal case is terminated
proceedings and drop the charges, it will not
led to a change in the election results and the vote will not be resumed
to the voters as he really would be.
The probability of the occurrence of a similar hypothesis in the process of
formation of the legislature requires the legislator to take
measures to prevent factors external to the electoral process and
circumstances to influence the> free exercise of
suffrage and, as a consequence, lead to a change in
election results.

The perception of the above gives grounds to
concluded that Art. 53, para. 1 of ZINP does not contradict art. 6, para. 2 of
The Constitution, on the one hand, does not establish a privilege,
based on one of the social features mentioned in the text, and on the other
party, the established privilege is socially necessary.

From the systematic place of the texts in the Constitution, which
establish restrictions on the criminal liability of borrowers
certain positions, it can be concluded that they do not exhaust
constitutionally> admissible> possibilities for> restriction of
criminal liability. The regulation of these restrictions is contained in
The Constitution, as they are part of the statute of the Constitution
the relevant authority. This conclusion is supported by the fact that in the beginning
the overall regulation of the conditions for the occurrence of criminal
responsibility for the order of its implementation, including the matter
on criminally responsible persons and hypotheses of release from
criminal liability is contained in legislative acts -
The Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. "IN
The constitution lacks an explicit provision on immunity from criminal law
responsibility as a separate legal institution with a certain content,
applicable only to certain persons. The provisions of Art.
69 and Art. 70, Art. 103, para. You 4 and Art. 132, para. 1 regulate the status of
Members of Parliament, the President and the Vice-President and the Judges,
prosecutors and investigators, part of which is the criminal

irresponsibility and criminal inviolability to the extent provided for in
the relevant texts. The constitutional principle of equality of
citizens is regulated in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, included in Chapter
first - Basic principles. The constitutional obligation to surrender
anyone accused of a crime of the judiciary is in Art. 31, para. 1,
included in Chapter Two - Fundamental Rights and Obligations of Citizens. A
the regulation which establishes restrictions in the criminal liability for
persons holding certain positions is not in Chapter One as
constitutionally regulated exception to the general principle of Art. 6, para. 2
(regardless of the social feature on which it is established), nor is it in the chapter
second as a constitutionally regulated exception to Art. 31, para. 1. The regulation
it is not unified and summarized as a separate legal institution, but is
included respectively in Chapter Three - National Assembly, Chapter Four -
President of the Republic and Chapter Six - Judiciary. In that
position of the interpretation of the texts in view of their systematic
place in the Constitution imposes the conclusion that the constitutional legislator
it has not set itself the objective of settling exhaustively the cases in which it is
admissible limitation of criminal liability, and has settled
such cases within the framework of the status of the relevant state bodies.
This means that there is no prohibition by law to establish themselves
restrictions on criminal liability, if these restrictions do not
contradict constitutional principles or texts.

There is no contradiction between Art. 31, para. 1 of the Constitution and Art.
53, para. 1 of the ZINP. According to the constitutional text, everyone accused of
crime must be handed over to the judiciary legally
defined term. In the case of Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP, limiting
the criminal “responsibility of> those registered for> participation in
parliamentary elections candidates and their proxies for the time
of the election campaign, sets another, also legal term, although
different from the general one, for their transfer to the judiciary.
Therefore, the text does not block the possibility of forming
criminal proceedings and does not> exclude the implementation of
criminal liability.

Sped as limiting the criminal liability of
the candidates for MPs and their deputies for
campaign time is not a privilege based on
social feature referred to in Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, and no
contradiction between art. 53, para. 1 of - ZINP and other constitutional text
or principle, there is no constitutional obstacle by law to be established
such restrictions and Art. 53, para. 1 of the ZINP does not contradict
The Constitution.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the Chief
Prosecutor of the Republic of Bulgaria for establishing
the unconstitutionality of Art. 53, para. 1 of the Law on Election of
MPs is unfounded and should be rejected.