OPINION

OF THE <COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
by “| constitutional case Me 6 of 2001
Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

The case was initiated at the request of 59 MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly for:

a / establishing the unconstitutionality of art. 1, para. 2c
the part under items 1111, 511 and 5.21, Art. 2, para. 1, vol. P, para. 2, para. 5 in the part
regarding the word "overfulfillment" and para. 8, Art. 9, para. You 2, art. 10, para. 1,
Art. 1, para. 1,2, 4 and 5, art. 13, para. 4 and 5 in the part concerning the words "the authorities of
the judiciary "," and the mayors "," Art. 2, para. 2 "and" Art. 9, para. 2, 8, 9, 20,
22, para. 2 and 3, 26, 30, 35, para. 2 and 37 of the Transitional and Final
provisions and appendices Me zi 4 of the State Budget Act of
Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (SG, issue 108 of 2000);

6 / establishing non-compliance with the challenged provisions,
relating to municipal budgets, with the principles of the European
charter for local self-government.

The Council of Ministers expresses the following opinion:

On the request to establish the unconstitutionality

of the provisions of Art. 2, para. 1, section P, para. 2, Bi 8

(budget of the judiciary)

According to para. 1, section P

The request maintains that section 1 in para. 1, determining
the costs of the judiciary contradict 129, 130 and 131 of
The Constitution, as it does not provide funds for the Supreme Judiciary
council, which is a constitutionally provided body and is an integral part of
the judiciary.

With Decision Me 17/1995 under cd. Me 13 from 1995, to which
refer also to the petitioners, the Constitutional Court has
stated that "annual budget laws are laws in formal
meaning only because they were voted under the name "law" by

National Assembly. Basically, their real content they do not
contain legal norms. In their expenditure part, they contain provisions
which authorize the state bodies to perform what they need
expenditures of state funds up to a certain amount.
The texts of the annual budget laws are acts by which
manage the funds from the national monetary fund. They are
management (administrative) acts, which without changing their
basic legal characteristics are issued inherent in
the acts of the National Assembly in the form (law) and in the manner provided by
the legislature procedure ....... Any law for annual
state budget of the country, which lacks funds for individuals
constitutionally established state institutions may be declared
for unconstitutional, as it paralyzes the activities of these
institutions ".

Insofar as there is no constitutional norm to determine
the mandatory content of the state budget must be
accept that the constitutional legislature has provided the decision to
this issue at the legal level. And because in the request are not expressed
doubts about the “constitutionality of> the relevant
provisions of the State Budget Structure Act (SBA),
governing this matter should be considered first and foremost
compliance of the> contested provision with the requirements of
special law.

According to Art. 22, para. 2 of the Law on State Budget, the state budget is adopted with
law on compound budgets, including their main types of revenues and
expenditures, the budget balance of the republican budget and its
financing, the total revenue and expenditure of the budgets of
state bodies and their relations with the central budget,
the relations of the state budget with the budgets of the municipalities and
relations with extra-budgetary funds.

With the provisions of art. 4 and 5 of the LULUCF, taking into account
the separation of powers and the requirements of special laws for
independence of certain state bodies, the legislator
has carefully defined the content of all the terms used in
Art. 22, para. 2 - "state budget" (covers the republican budget and
the budget of the judiciary), the "republican budget" (consisting of
central budget and budgets of public authorities) and "central
budget "(includes republican revenues and expenditures incurred
directly by the Council of Ministers or through rights delegated by it to
the Minister of Finance). In this respect, it should be noted that for
the goals of the budget process are not included in the concept by the legislator

"state bodies" the bodies of the judiciary - 5 1, item 1 of
The additional provisions of the LSDA.

From the above and not disputed by the petitioners
provision of art. 22, para. 2 of the LSBA, the conclusion that
the budget of the judiciary, which, although independent, is composite
part of the state budget must contain revenues and expenditures
of the judiciary, grouped according to the unified budget classification, but
not the revenues and expenses of the individual judicial authorities. There is no
a constitutional or legal requirement for the annual budget to include
the types of revenues and expenditures by individual state and judicial bodies and
the approach chosen by the legislator is the same with regard to
the republican budget as well as the budget of the judiciary. If
trace the structure of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic
Bulgaria for 2001, full compliance with the above-mentioned
above requirements of the legislator.

The applicants do not take into account the changes in the budget
process made with the Law on the Structure of the State Budget,
which has been in force since August 10, 1996. It repealed the Law on
drawing up and execution of the state budget, whose art. 2 determined
that the state budget is unified and covers the republican budget and
the budgets of the people's councils, and art. 12 - that the state budget is
compiles and submits to the National Assembly by types of revenues and expenditures under
ministries, departments and counties. A similar provision in the current
there is no structural law for the state budget.

On the other hand, the failure of the law to explicitly specify the costs
for the maintenance of the Supreme Judicial Council and the other judicial bodies
does not mean that the necessary means for the functioning of
these bodies are not provided for in the budget of the judiciary. IN
compliance with the constitutional requirement for independence of
the budget of the> judiciary> the legislator has provided
the distribution of the budget of the judiciary by the individual judiciary
bodies explicitly and only of the Supreme Judicial Council - Art. 23, para. 4 of the LSA.

In our opinion, the request is unfounded also because
the> arguments presented in the circumstantial part are for possible
unconstitutional refusal of the National Assembly to provide in
Art. 2 of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001.
funds for the Supreme Judicial Council (the absence of the
costs for other judicial authorities) within the total costs of
the judiciary, and the petitum has a broader content - to
found the unconstitutionality of the whole section 1, determining
the costs of the judiciary as a whole. As far as the Constitutional

a court is bound by the request made, the reasons for which are missing
such as unconstitutionality of the estimated costs for
the judiciary, the declared interest cannot be achieved through
the possible establishment and declaration of the unconstitutionality of
these costs.

According to para. 2

The impugned provision approves the budget subsidy
of the judiciary in the amount of 90 per cent of the determined amount under para. 1,
as the remaining 10 percent are provided only in case they are not
exceed the one approved by art. 1, para. 3 budget deficit.

It is maintained that the provision of 90 percent of the subsidy
turns the remaining 10 percent essentially into a subvention, like this one
way violates the autonomy of the budget of the independent
judicial power, which is made dependent on the person responsible for
the implementation of the state budget executive power. It is pointed out that
at the same time, to function properly, the judiciary is
obliged to make 100 percent of its expenses.

There is no constitutional prohibition for the legislator to introduce
rules for the process of implementation of the state budget. Not like that
is contained in Art. 117, para. 3, on which the request is based. Introduced
by the legislator rules on the implementation of the independent budget
of the judiciary, which includes the restriction under para. 2, are an expression
of the sovereign right of the National Assembly to adopt under
expediency restrictive norms. The attacked rule is
taking into account the fact that the budget of the judiciary is
integral part of the state budget and the purpose of this restriction is to
the size of the state budget deficit is controlled, not to
restricts the autonomy of the budget of the judiciary.

The claim that the difference from 90 to 100 percent of
the subsidy essentially became a subvention. In Rule
the subvention is an amount provided free of charge from the state budget
provided (provided, provided that it will be spent only
for the specified purpose), while for the "remaining 10 per cent" the presence of
the determined condition under par. 2 is a condition for their provision, not for
their consumption.

According to para. 5

The contested provision provides that overfulfillment or
the non - fulfillment of the revenues from fees from the activity of the bodies of
the judiciary is at the expense of the republican budget.

It is maintained that the legislator has provided for the seizure of part of
the revenue of the judiciary, which is an inadmissible interference of

the executive in the independent budget of the independent
judiciary. The petitioners refer to Decision Me 18/1993 of
KS on cd. Me 19 of 1993, giving a mandatory interpretation of Art. 117,
al. 3 of the Constitution on the independence of the judicial budget
power, as well as answers to some other questions. Saying that
drawing up, implementing and reporting on the budget of the judiciary
are outside the sphere of executive power and are an expression of
the constitutional requirement for autonomy of the budget of
the judiciary, the Constitutional Court says:

"But the independence of the judiciary budget does not
infringes the budgetary powers of the High Representative
body - the National Assembly. The National Assembly adopts the state one
budget and the report on its implementation, and an integral part of the state
budget is the independent budget of the judiciary ... The judiciary
power is supported by the budget. The sources of funds that are
necessary for balancing the votes voted by the National Assembly
annual expenses are collected through the revenue side of the republican
budget. The legal framework of the sources of funds of origin,
grounds and distribution is contained in the structural law for
budget ".

Revenues from fees from the activities of the judiciary indisputably
represent non-tax revenues of the state (Art. 2, para. 2 of the Law on Taxation).
There is no constitutional norm that determines that non-tax
revenues from the activity of the judicial bodies do not enter the state
budget, and in the independent budget of the judiciary. A question of
expediency and budgetary technique left by the constitutional
legislator to settle the ordinary legislator, is whether they will
come from the republican budget or from the budget of the judiciary
authority, as well as whether the necessary funds to support the judiciary
power will be provided entirely from the republican budget through
subsidy or the subsidy will cover the shortage of funds for
maintenance, unsecured by fee income.

We believe that incorrect para. 5 is perceived as restrictive
norm. Its purpose is to provide the necessary
funds for the maintenance of the judiciary. The quoted text from
the decision of the Constitutional Court in the request that the National Assembly should
"finally resolve all questions concerning the total budget
of the judiciary and the distribution of credit "can not
substantiate the opinion that with para. 5, the seizure of
revenue with unacceptable consequences for the autonomy of the budget and
the independence of the judiciary. The National Assembly has decided

"definitively" these issues by determining the specific amount of
the maintenance costs of the judiciary for 2001 and the sources of
funds for balancing them - revenues from fees in a certain amount
and a subsidy from the republican budget also in a certain amount. From
on the other hand, the independence of the budget of the judiciary does not
means that it can incur expenditures in excess of those adopted by the National
meeting.

According to para. 8

The contested provision provides that in cases where authorities
of the judiciary are housed in buildings owned by municipalities or
state, they do not pay rent.

The request alleges that the provision is contrary to the principle
of the rule of law, declared by Art. 4, para. 1 of the Constitution, since
contradicts several laws - the Law on Obligations and Contracts,
The State Property Act and the Municipal Property Act
property, consistently pursuing the rule that rent
legal relations are always remunerative.

The contested provision is completely different
purpose and its systematic place testifies to this. She
should be discussed and analyzed only with a view to
budgetary relations, on the one hand, of the state budget with
the budgets of the municipalities, and on the other hand, of the republican budget with
the budget of the judiciary. Its purpose is always (similar
there is a provision in the last few annual state laws
budget) was one thing - to point out and clarify to the authorities having
relationship with the state budget that rents for used by
Judiciary buildings owned by municipalities and the state are not
provided for in and not paid from the budget of the judiciary.
Apparently, the legislator has chosen an approach that he considered
appropriate in terms of the process of compilation and implementation
of the state budget. Instead of revenue for a budget that are
costs for another, balancing which revenues and costs indisputably
will be done through the relevant budgetary relationships he has chosen
the more economical approach - not to envisage spending on one budget for
the payment of rents in cases where revenues from another budget from
these rents will be reflected in the amount of the subsidy.

From this point of view it cannot be assumed that with para. 8 cited
substantive laws are violated - if the judiciary "does not pay
rents "from your budget, this does not mean that rents are not due and
the state budget does not pay them indirectly through the subsidy for
municipalities.

It is maintained that para. 8 also contradicts Art. 140 of the Constitution,
according to which the municipality has the right of ownership, which uses in
interest of the territorial community. No arguments are set out in what
the contradiction is expressed. We believe that the law of the municipality of
property bound by its obligation to use it in the interest of
territorial community, it does not follow that the property must bear
obligatory and only financial revenues for the municipality and its population.
The benefit for the territorial community is above all in the vicinity of
judicial authorities and government agencies to citizens, not c
income from these buildings From a formal point of view these
relationships could be settled in other ways, but
insofar as there is no specific constitutional norm for
the relations of the state budget with the budgets of the municipalities,
obviously the form of subsidies and contributions would still be used.

On the request to establish the unconstitutionality
of Art. 1, para. 2 in the part under items 1.11.1, 5.1.1 and 5.2.1, Art. 9, para. 1
and 2, Art. 10, para. 1, art. 11, para. 1, 2, 4 and 5, Art. 13, para. 4 iBv
the part concerning the words "the judiciary," and
the mayors "," art. 2, para. 2 "and" Art. 9, para. 2 ", 8 9, 20, 22, para 2 and
3, 26, 30, 35, para. 2 and 37 of the Transitional and Final
provisions and Annex M Zi 4

(the relationship of the state budget with the budgets
of municipalities)

The impugned provisions govern the relationship of
the state budget with the budgets of the municipalities and the methodology, based on
on which the budgetary relations are determined.

The petitioners refer to the constitutional principles for
independence of municipal budgets, for the obligation of
the state to support the municipalities to provide the necessary
funds in the state budget for the normal functioning of
constitutionally provided bodies and maintain that the state
The 2001 budget violates these principles by:

a / does not ensure the normal functioning of the municipalities and
their organs;

6 / does not ensure the independence of the municipal councils at
resolving issues of local importance due to the inability to
plan the funds for them;

c / does not fully cover the expenses of the local budgets under
performance of functions delegated by the state;

d / allowed by the Council of Ministers and other central bodies
(including the National Assembly) to seize the powers of

municipal councils for the compilation, implementation and reporting of
municipal budgets, as well as to make changes in them - reductions,
credit transfers, changes;

e / allows the Council of Ministers and the Minister of Finance to
seize the powers of the National Assembly, judging instead
him the draft budgets of the municipalities "due to a request from the municipal
council or by the mayor for subsidies, offer cuts to
illegal or incorrect expenses.

We consider the request to be unfounded and unfounded, as from
from the point of view of the Constitution the independence of the municipalities
budgets are guaranteed through the permanent financial sources of
municipalities determined by law and the law of local authorities
self-government to draw up, adopt and implement the budgets of
municipalities. In order to guarantee real local self-government,
the constitutional legislator has introduced an obligation for the state to
supports municipalities. Contributions or subsidies are an element of
the budgetary relations between the state and the municipalities and
insofar as there is no constitutional norm to regulate them differently
way, the legislator has the right to determine the mechanism by which to
achieve a balance between public and local interests.

"There is no constitutional prohibition for the legislator to introduce
rules for the process of compiling and implementing the municipal budget "-
Decision Me 2/2001 of the Constitutional Court under c.d. Me 10 of 2000. The draft budget
of the municipality, the compilation of which in accordance with the submitted
information from the Ministry of Finance is assigned to the mayor, no
is a final decision and does not affect the independence of the municipalities.
The order for drawing up and execution of the municipal budgets, the determination
of which is a sovereign right of the legislator, is irrelevant to
the autonomy of these budgets. Municipalities> implement
their normal activity by exercising primarily on their own
their budgets, and not through subsidies from the republican budget, the purpose of which is
to support this activity, not to provide it. The specific dimensions of
the subsidy for the municipalities is a matter of legislative expediency by
in terms of the possibilities of the state budget and the balance
between public and local interests. However, they are, even if they are
insufficient, in no way intended to limit
the independence of municipal budgets and the right of the bodies of
local government to make their own decisions.

The request contains an analysis of the relations between the state
budget and the budgets of the municipalities, from which the conclusion is substantiated that
the funds provided in the draft law on the state budget for

supporting the activities of municipalities should be relied on
the basis of the draft budgets drawn up by the municipalities themselves and not by
The Ministry of Finance should also have the People's Office at their disposal
assembly at the adoption of the state budget. We believe not
disputes the competence of the National Assembly to regulate
the relations between the state and municipal budgets - from the drawing up
to the report on their implementation. There is no constitutional norm to
obliges the National Assembly in the adoption of the state budget
to comply with the draft budgets of the municipalities. When accepting
the state budget The National Assembly is subordinated only to
the constitutional requirements and the laws adopted by him, as they
substantiate the public interests, the protection of which requires and must
be financially provided by the state budget. The constitution does not
presupposes a contradiction, and a balance between public and local
interests and the National Assembly is the body to which it has provided
achieving this balance.

The request unreasonably maintains that the unforeseen
funds in the state budget for 2001, guaranteeing in full
the normal activity of the municipalities, as well as in case of non-fulfillment of
the planned revenues leads to its unconstitutionality.
The provision of Art. 9, para. 2 of the law by which the subsidies for the municipalities
are approved in the amount of 90 percent, is perceived as a restriction for
the normal activity of the municipalities and violation of art. 141, para. 3 of
The Constitution. In view of the independence of the municipal budgets, s
the requirement to support the normal operation of municipalities, from
on the one hand, real local self-government is guaranteed, and on the other -
balanced support to municipalities that do not have their own revenues
or the amount of this revenue is not sufficient to resolve
main issues of local self-government.

On the request for establishing non-compliance with Art. 9,
items 1 2, 4 and 6 of the European Charter of Local Government
self-government

With Art. 9 of the European Charter of Local Self - Government for
the financial resources of the local self-government bodies are
defined rules and mechanisms to ensure sufficient
own financial resources within the national
economic policy for local authorities to implement
the initiatives taken by them, which are not excluded from theirs
competence or delegated to another authority.

A substantial part of these norms is reproduced in
The Constitution, the Law on Local Self-Government and Local Government

administration, the Law on Municipal Budgets and the Law on
the structure of the state budget, which contain norms analogous
of the specified international norms. With the material tax laws
the permanent financial sources of the municipalities are provided,
what is the requirement of art. 9, item 3 of the Charter. From this point of view it is
possible assessment of the compliance of international norms with these
laws that regulate the relationship permanently and their effect is not
limited in time, the establishment of
inconsistency of international legal norms with a formal one
a law such as the disputed Law on the State Budget of the Republic
Bulgaria for 2001, which, in addition to not containing legal norms (no
regulates public relations), is valid for the period from 1 January to 31
December 2001

In addition, the request in its part for the relationship between
state and municipal budgets is too general and possible
violations are not specified. As far as in the annual law for
the state budget these relationships have a certain monetary
expression if the importers claim that the funds are insufficient for
the normal activity of the municipalities in Bulgaria and the state budget
has greater opportunities than those estimated by the People's
assembly, must indicate and provide evidence to that effect.
The Council of Ministers could not comment on the appropriateness of
the specific amounts of the funds provided in the state budget for
2001 for the municipalities, and it seems to us that this also applies to
The Constitutional Court, provided that according to the Constitution this
it is a matter of the exclusive competence of the National Assembly and
there is no imperative constitutional norm.

Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

We hope that for the above reasons the request for
declaring> the unconstitutionality of the> mentioned> legal
provisions and the non-compliance of some of them with the European Charter
for local government will be rejected as unfounded and
unreasonable.