DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

With a request on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution a group of people
representatives of the XXXUS National Assembly dispute
the constitutionality of the newly adopted Law for amendment and
amendment to the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State
security (SG, issue 24/2001). The request contains arguments for
unconstitutionality of a law, in view of the procedure of its adoption,
as well as those which justify a contradiction with the basic law of
separate provisions thereof.

Given the fact that the grounds for contradiction with
The Constitution of individual provisions of the disputed law on its own
essence are arguments of expediency, we find that they cannot be
considered as grounds on which to judge
the constitutionality of the individual legal provisions. that's why
we do not support the view of the alleged contradiction with
The Constitution of individual provisions of the newly adopted law.

In support of our understanding, we want to point out the fact that
the affiliation of members of the government to one or another party
does not result in a contradiction with the Constitution of formed by
executive committees that exist and carry out their
activity on the basis of the provisions of the law.

In its request, the group of MPs claims a contradiction
of the said law with the Constitution, alleging violations in the procedure

of its vote, which is regulated in the Rules of Organization and
the activity of the National Assembly (Rules of Procedure). Undoubtedly the observance of
individual legal norms is one of the characteristics of the rule of law,
but not every contradiction with a legal norm results in a contradiction with
The Constitution.

As it is known to the court at the first vote the bills are
discuss in full and the MPs rule on the main ones
issues of regulated public relations (Article 66 of the Regulations). Here
why the number of texts of the future law of this first vote and that of
the adoption of the bill in its final form, after the vote
text by text, has no legal significance for violation of the Regulations and without
no doubt about the Constitution either.

Violations of the Regulations, if any, have no consequence
mandatory violation of the law.

In addition, these violations can only be identified by
stenographic protocols, which are official documents and have
probative value for the statements, circumstances and
findings, including the number of MPs present
(quorum), for the number of those who voted "for", "against" or "abstained", etc.,
which findings can be made only by the National Assembly.
The Constitutional Court cannot open proceedings against them
contestation.

In assessing the constitutionality of the procedure in
voting and adoption of the acts of the National Assembly the court should
based solely on the data in the transcripts of the meetings
of the National Assembly.

These are our arguments to assume that there are no grounds for
declaring the newly adopted law unconstitutional in

its integrity. >