OPINION

of the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation
on constitutional case He 2/2001

The Constitutional Court has admitted for consideration on the merits the request of
a group (56) of MPs from the XXXUP National Assembly, as well as
the request of a panel of judges of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court
for declaring unconstitutionality of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria (promulgated SG No. 108/2000), which
reads:

The only member. They are not subject to appeal, do not contain factual grounds and
the orders issued on the grounds of art. 40, para. 1, item 2 in
connection with art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, item D of the Law on
foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria who impose coercive administrative measures,
directly related to the security of the country. The judgment of the court whether given
administrative act is directly related to the security of the country, is exhausted
only with the legal basis for its issuance specified in the order. That means the court
cannot consider appeals against such orders and they are left without consideration of
grounds of art. 20, para. 1, item 5 of the Law on the Supreme Administrative Court or on the grounds of Art.
34, item Gi4 of the Administrative Procedure Act. The court cannot collect
evidence of the facts and circumstances that motivated the authority that issued the order. IN
in cases where a hearing is allowed, the court is obliged to terminate the proceedings.
Judicial act on the merits, ruled on an appeal against an order issued on the basis of Art. 40,
al. 1, item 2 in connection with Art. 10, para. 1, item 1, on the grounds of art. 42 or on the grounds of art. 10, para. 1, item 1
of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, is null and void and does not give rise to legal consequences.

FINAL PROVISION
Paragraph only. This law of interpretation has effect from entry
in force of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria.

1. To what extent is admission admissible and in accordance with the Constitution?
of an interpretative law retroactively by the National Assembly

1. Each legislative power has the main function to adopt, amend, supplement
and repeals laws. It also includes the possibility of an authentic interpretation of
the content of the will of the legislator by himself. The Constitutional Court
he has already found some of the norms discussed to be "interpretive" without them being
explicitly called so by the legislator himself.

Because the interpretative acts specify the original will of
the legislator, in theory it is assumed that any interpretive law has the opposite
action - it acts from the moment of adoption of the interpreted norm.

2. This does not mean that the retroactive effect of an interpretive law can be
revoked, or negatively affected already granted rights, to be sanctioned ex rose!
Tasso behavior, or to eliminate the consequences of the provisions of
the force of the initially adopted norm and entered into force decisions of
the courts. Such a possibility would mean a lack of legality and would
made the very existence of the judiciary meaningless.

Conversely, constitutional theory and its principles allow for interpretation
acts retroactively only in so far as they analyze the content of
existing norm without extending its effect to the detriment of the rights and
without prejudice to acts enacted in accordance with the law. It is this way because

the basic principles of constitutionalism - separation of powers, security and
guarantees of fundamental rights, the rule of law and legal stability,
are a higher principle of constitutionalism than one that allows
the authoritative retroactive interpretation of a normative act.

3. In the constitutional theory and practice it is accepted “(that
constitutionally retroactive laws may be enacted
only in so far as they improve rather than worsen the legal position of persons,
whose individual rights are affected - such as amnesty, decriminalization
of acts, etc. The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria provides for a prohibition
for retroactive effect only of criminal laws, where this principle is
conducted to the end. This does not mean that the retroactive infringement of the rights of
citizens is possible, but is an indication that the legislator did not consider
necessary to express explicitly this principle of constitutionalism, since
it is fundamental and implied in every state governed by the rule of law. Prohibition of reverse
effect of norms that negatively affect the legal status of the person or
creates or aggravates its liability, is explicitly provided for in the recent
the adopted constitutions of the newly formed Central Asian states. In the article
149 of the Constitution of Azerbaijan reads: "The normative acts,
improving the legal status of the natural and legal person,
revoking or mitigating his legal liability may have the opposite effect
force ... Other normative acts have no retroactive force ". The same principle applies
it also contains in the constitutions of Kazakhstan / art. 77, para 5 / and Georgia / art. 42, para 5 /.

4. On the other hand, from the reasons to the law it is clear that the will of
the legislator was not only to specify the content of the adopted norm of Art.
47, but also to give instructions to the courts in the country regarding its uniformity
interpretation and application - a power provided by the Constitution
only in court.

Q. To what extent is an interpretation admissible and in accordance with the Constitution?
of a law by the National Assembly regarding the manner of its implementation
from the courts

1. The authoritative interpretation of the legislator's own will for
the content of the norm should be distinguished from the interpretation of
the exact and uniform application of the law provided by the constitution
only in the courts. In the decision of Jo 27/98 on cd. 20/98,
The Constitutional Court has expressed the opinion that: “like the Supreme Court of Cassation
court and the Supreme Administrative Court carry out their
powers under Art. 124 and Art. 125 of the Constitution primarily through its
interpretive activity. "

Art. 124. The Supreme Court of Cassation shall exercise supreme judicial supervision over
accurate and uniform application of the laws by all courts.

Art. 125. (1) The Supreme Administrative Court shall exercise supreme judicial
supervision of the accurate and uniform application of the laws in the administrative
justice.

For the stated reasons, we believe that the National Assembly can accept
retroactive laws of an interpretative nature, insofar as they clarify
the early expressed will of the legislator and are not further limited ex roBg
Tasso rights of individuals. As for the interpretation of the law on
its exact and uniform application by the courts, this function is assigned by
the constitution of the judiciary, not the legislature.

2. The motives to the Law for the interpretation of art. 47 of the FRBA explicitly state that
The National Assembly considers it necessary to interpret the law instead of the courts
- precisely as regards its precise and uniform application by them. The motives
of the petitioners analyze the judicial activity and the content itself
of the law constitutes direct instructions to the courts as to how
law enforcement. In addition to the seizure of these constitutionally
regulated functions, the Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 ZCHRB directly
disposes of acts issued by the courts, explicitly takes away
the powers of the court to rule on the admissibility of pending and future
disputes, and directly orders the termination of accepted for consideration by the court
disputes.

3. Neither the guarantees of rights nor the balance of power could
exist if parliament has the opportunity to intervene directly in
the work of the judiciary by annulling issued judicial acts. From one
side, this makes the existence of the judiciary itself meaningless by taking away
essential element of it - to bind the parties to the dispute with the consequences of
a final decision and oblige the other persons to comply with
this decision. On the other hand, if such interference is allowed, it would be
affect the rights which the parties bound by the decision in question
acquire, and in principle would, to the greatest extent, damage the confidence of
citizens in justice and the existence of the rule of law.

4. In the present case, breach of the principle of separation of powers, a
hence the contradiction with the Constitution and its basic principles, the
in the first place is the deprivation of judgments of
the finality they had after their entry into force. It is introduced
a precedent by which one came into force and produced legal consequences
a judicial act may be corrected by an act of the legislature and on its own
discretion. This contradicts the principle of separation of powers and is not
known in world constitutionalism.

5. The legislature has the power to prescribe rules for
behavior that should be observed by every citizen, but
the power to interpret and apply these rules in each
a specific case is part of the judicial activity. With the CA a whole group
judicial acts, which have already given rise to rights and obligations for the parties to them, are
declare null and void. At the same time, the law gives direct instructions to
courts how to hear cases, ie. the essential element of
the administration of justice, namely the right of the court to assess the facts and the right to
own independent discretion.

The inadmissibility of such interference was emphasized at the outset
the development of scientific political and constitutional thought. Alexander
Hamilton points out that “neither the British nor the constitutions of the individual
States allow a judgment to be reviewed or
decided by an act of the legislature ”The Great American
constitutionalist Thomas Cowley posed this very problem
in 1868:

"If the legislator cannot exercise any indirectness
control over the courts, requiring them to interpret and
apply the law according to his own point of view, it is obvious that
nor can it do so directly by rejecting their decisions,
forcing them to start new processes, ordering them to justify
violators of the law or ordering them what specific steps to take
undertake in the course of a court hearing ”.

6. The relationship between the legislature and the judiciary in
the constitutional history of the United States, in our view, largely shows
the importance of the principle and its development over the last 200 years.
Fundamental to clarify and apply the principle of division of
authorities is the decision of 1803. in the case of Marbury v. Madison (Magriu W.
Madwop) of the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled that every court has
the right and obligation to invalidate and annul legislation that is
incompatible with the interpretation of the Constitution given by the Supreme Court. IN
the decision states that “it is certainly in the competence and in the obligations
of the judiciary to say what the law contains (10 zauta! Me du, 15) ”.

Further in the same decision states that those who apply a rule
in relation to specific cases, they must necessarily interpret and clarify
this rule. In the case of Cooper v. Aaron (Sooreg v. Aagop) of 1958, he says that
"The judiciary is supreme in its interpretation
the content of the Constitution and the laws ”...“ Any other conclusion
would be contrary to the basic concept of the separation of powers and
the balance resulting from the scheme of this principle ”. (Opied Bumez u. Mkop -
1974). As for legislation affecting judicial decisions
acts, in the case SShsaro 8. Boshchet Ap ez, ps. y. Maepiap 8. 5. Sogr. 1948 is said to
“Decisions that are made within the powers that
the constitution, given to the courts, cannot be legally reviewed,
cancel or deny their legal significance by any party
by the other authorities in the state ”, as he claims“ ... no court decision in
The United States may not, under any circumstances, be subject to review, and
even of repeal, by the legislature, in whose hands as under
it seems that no judicial power of any kind has been given ”.
LNaurstz Saze, 1792 "... the acts of the Congress cannot have for
resulting in the annulment of a judgment which has already been given,
or the rights defined by it ... This is a principled position that cannot
to be denied - especially when it comes to a decision related to personal
rights of the parties to the case. When the decision has already been made, the right
becomes absolutely ... Reppzu! UUpeiter in: Veto Vpee So., 1856 /

 

7. The principle that retroactive legislation is an exception to the general
rule that laws have no retroactive effect has its deeper
argumentation in the principle of legality and justice, which command to
everything legally performed under the action of the old one remains in force
law. "Whoever violates the principle that laws have no retroactive effect,
it actually violates the people's sense of legal security ”(Tseko
Bags; "General Theory of Law and the State", Sofia, 1992, p.389).

The protection of the prerogatives of the judiciary and its independence from
the legislative against the retroactive effect of the laws is clearly manifested and
in the decision of the US Air Force in the case Plot / Mash y. Zrepf pl Vagt, ts.1995 /
It examines an attempt by Congress to declare invalid final entries
in force court decisions and order the courts to resume consideration of
closed cases with final decisions through retroactive legislation.
The US Air Force has declared the law unconstitutional because it violates it.
the principles of separation of powers. “A final decision of
the judiciary must be, in practice, so is any attempt by
the legislator to change this situation is an interference in power,
which is explicitly given to the judicial authorities ”.

8. For these reasons we consider that the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 ZCHRB
contradicts the principle of separation of powers, which is a fundamental principle
of the Bulgarian state, reflected in Art. 8 of the Constitution ..

Sh. To what extent the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA is valid
interpretative and admissible from the Constitution given by it
interpretation

1. In the requests for declaring unconstitutionality of the discussed law
contains allegations that it is given back by an interpretive law
effect of new substantive and procedural norms to the detriment of basic
rights.

2. Part of the discussed law interprets the provision of art. 47 ZCHRB c
the frameworks permitted by the principles of the constitution and the rule of law.
The interpretative law explicitly limits the scope of art. 47 to
“The orders issued on the grounds of art. 40 para. 1 item 2 in connection with Art. 10 para. 1
item You art. 42, or on the grounds of art. 10 para. 1 item 1 of the FRBA ”, in which exactly
indicate substantive grounds related to national security.
Thus, the application of Art. 47 in relation to the others
measures provided for in Chapter Five of the FRBA.

3. The only logical and constitutional interpretation of the applied one
field of art. 47 of the FRBA is the restrictive - reducing provided in the text
of Art. 47 line only to cases directly related to the security of
the country. By the way, in most cases the courts have applied Art. 47 exactly
and before the adoption of the Law on its interpretation.

Insofar as this part of the law is interpreted restrictively, the field of Art.
47 of the LFRB, do not encroach on the excavation: Easgo of existing rights, but on the contrary - explicitly

”

the will of the legislator to prevent its expansion is specified
application to the detriment of the rights and interests of the persons concerned.

4. With the request for declaring unconstitutionality of the Interpretative
law disputes the possibility of decisions of the administration - to refuse
from issuing a visa under Art. 10 para. 1 item 1, to be included in the application
field of art. 47, which referred only to “orders under this section”. It is said,
that the interpretative law expands the scope of art. 47. Immigration
each country's policy is a domestic policy issue and decisions to give
or denial of access to its territory shall not be subject to appeal to a court
or otherwise in many democracies. At the same time, because
the persons concerned are not in the territory of the State, the refusal of access
it cannot in itself affect any rights. With herself
non-admission that State has refused to admit persons under its jurisdiction and
to grant and guarantee them any rights. For the same reason
such refusals are not subject to control under the ZAP in principle, as c
they cannot be affected by the individual rights granted. That's why,
we consider that the inclusion of the decisions for refusal of visa on the grounds of art. 10
al. 1 item 1 in the field of application of Art. 47 of the FRBA, although unsuccessfully from
from the point of view of a systematic approach of the legislator can not be
subject to a dispute as to constitutionality.

5. Careful reading of the Law on Interpretation in its remaining part and of
the motives for it show that they do not narrow, but silently expand
the scope of art. 47 of the FRBA - regarding the interpretation of the concept
"Directly related to the security of the country" and the restriction of
the possibilities for any protection of the persons concerned. The dowry
by interpreting a new content of Art. 47 of the FRBA raises new ones - different from
considered with a Decision under cd. 15/2000 questions concerning the compliance of
the interpreted text with the provision of art. 27 (1) нand the constitution - “Foreigners,
who reside in the country legally cannot be
expelled from it or handed over to another state against their will, except
under the conditions and by the order determined by law.

6. While the original text of Art. 47 allows the imposition of coercive
“Administrative measures directly related to the security of
country ”, the text of the Law on Interpretation includes many more hypotheses,
in which the deprivation of the right of residence and expulsion is permissible
of foreigners.

From the reasons to the Law on Interpretation it is clear that the will of the legislator is
just like that. Although the original text of the law separates the concepts
"Security of the country" and "interests of the state", according to the petitioners and
when the interests of the Bulgarian state are endangered, this too
affects the security interests of the country. " The legislator also changes his own
own views on the concept of "security of the country", including not
only what the original law called "national security" or
"Security of the country", but also the extremely broad concept of "interests of
Bulgarian State".

Thus, from the applicability of the restrictive measures under Art. 47 ZCHRB only c
cases directly related to the security of the country where
the urgency procedure and the preliminary feasibility could be
justified, the interpretation significantly changes the meaning of the law, which
already includes measures against any person who has “put in danger
the interests of the Bulgarian state ”or“ its presence in the country
creates a serious threat to ... public order ”- / Art. 42 a.m. last /.

7. Cases in which the person concerned has “endangered interests
of the Bulgarian state ”, or its presence in the country creates
a serious threat to ... public order ”could be not only those
referred to in Art. 10 para. 1 item 1, but also all other cases specified in Art. 10
al. | from the FRBA:

- by his actions he has discredited the Bulgarian state or has damaged its prestige
the dignity of the Bulgarian people;

- has information that he is a member of a criminal group or organization or that he commits
terrorist activity, smuggling and illegal arms deals, explosives
substances, ammunition, strategic raw materials, goods and technologies with
possible dual use, as well as illicit trafficking in narcotics and
psychotropic substances and precursors and raw materials for their production;

there is evidence that he is trafficking in human beings and smuggling into the country, and
removal of persons to other countries;

- it can be assumed that it will spread a severe contagious disease suffering from
disease, "which according to the criteria of the" Ministry of
health or the World Health Organization represents
threat to public health, or does not hold a certificate for
vaccination, or comes from an area with complicated epidemic and epizootic
situation;

- no maintenance is provided and the necessary compulsory insurance during
time of residence in the country and means providing an opportunity
for his return; etc.

Some of these hypotheses, such as acute infectious disease,
which could cause an epidemic, could affect the public interest and
order, but could hardly be linked to national security in the usual
meaning of this concept.

8. With the extended concept of “security of
the country ”the interpreted art. 47 is practically applicable to
any actions and behavior of a foreigner that the executive authorities
authorities are considered to be related to the security, public order and interests of
the state. This makes it possible to impose measures under Art. 47 to be
performed in a vague, indefinable and extremely wide range of conditions.

9. While the ones indicated in art. 10 para. | t. | cases may be acceptable
grounds for refusal of visa / what is the purpose of the text /, broad
wording on the same substantive grounds is inappropriate for
revocation of already provided and guaranteed by laws and the constitution
rights. Such an interpretation does not comply with the requirements of the Constitution

for clarity on the conditions for revoking the right of legal residence, and
expulsion. It can hardly be assumed that the original will of
the legislator was to formulate the text of Art. 47 so:

"They are not subject to appeal, they do not contain factual grounds and
subject to immediate execution of the orders of the Minister of
the interior and the persons authorized by him to seize
the right of legal residence of aliens who threaten
the interests of the Bulgarian state and the expulsion of foreigners,
which pose a serious threat to public order. "

10. Such a will renders meaningless the creation and operation of the rest of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria is in essence directly contradictory
of Art. 27. (1) of the Constitution:

"Foreigners residing in the country legally, no
may be expelled from it or handed over to another state against
their will, except under the conditions and by the order determined by law. ”

11. At the same time, the Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 LFRB expands and changes
the original meaning of the interpreted law and as regards the requirement of
the constitution on "the order determined by law".

Required by the original text of Art. 47 of the FRBA ”direct connection
with the security of the country ”implies objectified actions, which
impose an immediate response in the interests of security. In the Act on
the interpretation of this text indicates all listed in Art. 10 para. | t. | cases
i.e. and persons for whom “there is evidence that he / she acts against the security of
the country ”.

Thus, the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 explicitly includes the possibility of.
imposition of measures based on data whose “direct link to
the security of the country ”could not be checked under the Law on
administrative proceedings, as the laws provide for another order for
the collection of data of such Character.

This excludes the operation of the ZAP not only as regards
the motivation of the orders and their appealability -> as it is
the initial expressed will, but also with regard to the general order of the Law on
administrative proceedings - as regards the procedure for the issuance of
the administrative act.

By the way, the content of the reasons for the> bill> remains
the impression that this is the intention of the interpreter - legislator.
Art. 46 states that “for the issuance of the orders under this section and for their
The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to the appeal. Art. 47 para. D of the same law
contains an exception to this rule ... ”The original meaning of 46 and Art.
47 taken together should not preclude the need to comply with
the other provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act for issuing administrative acts such as
informing the affected person about the initiated procedures, providing

the possibility for an opinion and objections of this person on the collected data,
which give grounds for taking measures, etc.

12. Even if the impression that the interpreter explicitly cancels is wrong
fully the operation of the ZAP, the lack of any with control for
the legality of the acts, as well as their immediate enforceability
repeal tacitly provided by law the procedure for issuance and execution of
expulsion measures is the deprivation of the right of residence of foreigners in
the country.

Taken in its entirety, the provisions of the Law on Interpreted Art. 47 provide
unlimited possibility for arbitrary and uncontrolled disposal of
the rights of this category of persons whenever due to unwillingness to comply with
the law, due to ignorance of it, or due to overdoing, the representatives of
the executive saw in their presence a threat to the national
security, or invoke it, albeit without reason.

13. In the absence of another control mechanism imposed by the discussed law
an absolute ban on courts accepting appeals against
the acts in question also mean a complete lack of any control by
authority independent of the issuer. The complete lack of procedural guarantees
tacitly releases the issuing body itself from the obligations to comply
the general provisions of the ZAP, as well as the FRBA itself in connection with
substantive grounds and / or procedural rules. We believe that
in this way the meaning of the requirements of art. 27 para 1 / of the Constitution is also deleted
"Order determined by law".

The open possibility for too wide and uncontrolled interpretation and application
of Art. 47 in conjunction with Art. 40 and 42 of the FRBA in practice relieves the bodies of
the executive from the obligation to comply with the requirements of the Act itself
for foreigners and repeals the Administrative Act
production. "Contrary to the Constitution, it is practically being introduced
the possibility of FOREIGNERS RESIDING IN THE COUNTRY OF
LEGAL GROUNDS THAT THEY CAN ALWAYS BE EXPELLED FROM
her.

14. With the Law on the Interpretation of a Norm of the FRBA an attempt is made to
misinterpretation of the constitutional content of the concept
"Conditions and order provided by law", referred to in Art. 27 of the Constitution.
With Decision Ho 3 of 1992 on c.d. 30/91 the Constitutional Court has excluded itself
possibility for authoritative interpretation of constitutional norms by law:
"The right of the National Assembly to give cannot be denied
obligatory (authentic) interpretation of constitutional norms ... / n / 0 ...
only under the conditions and in the order under which the National Assembly amends and supplements
provisions of the Constitution ... (art. 153 et seq. of the Constitution). With the norm
of ordinary law ... this cannot happen ”

15. For these reasons, we consider that the new provision of the Act
content of art. 47 of the FRBA is an attempt to interpret a constitutional norm,

reaching the abolition of the guarantees required by this norm for basic
individual rights.

TU. To what extent is the effect of the given by
The Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 LFRB new meaning of the norm

1. The newly introduced with the Law on Interpretation immediately and without appeal
execution of the targeted orders allows the expulsion of foreigners even
and in cases where the expulsion of some is prohibited by another law
categories of persons who are under the protection of international
treaties such as the Geneva Convention on Refugees, the International Convention
convention for the prevention of torture, etc.

The envisaged "immediate implementation" of the envisaged measures, tacitly
repeals Art. 61. of the Refugee Act:

(1) Coercive administrative measures, such as "deprivation of the right to
residence "," forced removal to the border "," expulsion ",
"extradition" and "ban on entry" imposed by
law or an international treaty to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party, of
a foreigner who has declared that he is a refugee is not enforced until the ruling
of the decision of the Chairperson of the Refugee Agency, respectively to
completion of the accelerated refugee status proceedings.

(2) The coercive administrative measures under para. | are canceled when with
the decision of the chairman of the Agency for Refugees of the Foreigner is
granted refugee status or status under Art. 56, para. 1, item 3 or 4 - for
granting protection by year of a refugee recognized under the mandate
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
or the provision of humanitarian protection by the President of the Agency
refugees.

2. He rudely ignores and

THE CONVENTION

against torture and other cruel,

inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

Ratified by Decree Ho 3384 of the State Council of October 9, 1986. Promulgated, SG no.
42 of 3.06.1988, in force for Bulgaria from 26.06.1987, amended. and add., no. 19 from
February 24, 1995

Article 3

No State Party may expel, return
("tegosheg") or extradite a person to another country when there are serious
grounds to believe that it would be in danger of being subjected to
torture.

To determine whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities take
having regard to all the relevant circumstances, including, in
depending on the case, the existence in the country of a systemic
recurrent serious, gross or mass violations of human rights.

According to Art. 2, item 4 of the Law for withdrawal of the reserve and acceptance of declarations
under international conventions of April 1, 1993, published in the State Gazette, issue 30 of 1993
Bulgaria has stated that in accordance with Art. 22 of the same Convention, acknowledges
the competences of the Committee against Torture to receive and consider
communications directly or on behalf of persons under its jurisdiction who claim
that they are a victim of a violation of the provisions of the Convention by a state
- a Party to this Convention. The same Committee shall periodically examine the reports of
States Parties to the Convention on the Content of Laws and
the practice of their application.

3. The Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation provided to
The Constitutional Court opinion on the original text of Art. 47 ZCHRB, c
which examines in detail the need to provide effective
domestic remedies to protect the fundamental rights of the individual from
their possible affection with the ones ruled by the order of art. 47 measures. These
fundamental rights are guaranteed both in the ECHR and in the Bulgarian constitution.
In view of our understanding that the Act under discussion in this case
interpretation of Art. 47 of the FRBA further worsens the situation of those affected
individuals, we would also like to point out the following:

4. Bulgarian law does not provide a procedure for their protection
fundamental rights, possibly affected by the measures under Art. 47 of the FRBA, as
requires art. 13 of the European Convention on Human and Fundamental Rights
freedom. Instead of introducing such funds, prohibiting the courts
to deal with complaints - whether or not the complaints are not directly related
the affected right of residence in the country, and with the deprivation and violation of
other constitutional rights guaranteed by international instruments on
protection of human rights, the Law on the Interpretation of Art. 47 explicitly deleted.
and the last chance to protect these rights.

Undoubtedly, as the original text of Art. 47 of the FRBA, as well as the Law on
interpretations are designed to protect national security - subject to
increased protection in any society as a core value. The Constitution
points to national security as a fundamental principle of a democratic society
along with the fundamental rights of individuals, but not with an advantage over them. She does not
grades in no way the degree of security of these public
interests by placing national security above constitutional ones
rights of individuals, or vice versa. On the contrary, in connection with the need for
the protection of> national security, the Constitution itself, and
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
allow the restriction of the exercise only to those explicitly stated in these
acts of law.

If the opposite interpretation were correct, the Constitution would allow
encroachment on any constitutional right whenever the guarantees of
individual constitutional rights compete with the public interest from
protection of national security.

5. The possibility of national security to be absolute a rpog? would
found a direct and unlimited possibility of abuse of power through
arbitrary reference to this ground - in order to avoid possible
control over the actions of the executive authorities in violation
of individual rights and freedoms. This would set a precedent that
makes senseless the proclamation of fundamental rights and freedoms as a fundamental principle
of our state not only for foreigners, but also for all persons under
the jurisdiction of the Republic of Bulgaria.

By imposing a ban on judicial control over each and everyone
administrative measures imposed by an executive body in connection.
with imminent danger to national security, the Interpretative Law
excludes the possibility for the court to decide whether to accept for consideration
a complaint against the nullity of an act of the administration, as well as his
prohibits discussing both the admissibility and the substance of any
complaints that the appealed act also affects something else - mainly and
irrevocable right of the person concerned. In essence, this means withdrawal
not only the right to judicial review, but also the most essential fundamental
function referred to in Art. 117 - protection of the rights and freedoms of citizens.
This would mean the withdrawal of guarantees for any and all fundamental rights
and freedoms protected by the Constitution and the granting of freedom to
abuse of executive power, from which they are not insured and most
developed democracies.

6. The theory of constitutional law knows rights over which they are not
no restrictions permissible, rights to which restrictions are
admissible only in case of war, martial law or other state of emergency,
as well as rights whose restriction is permissible in the interest of others
constitutional values, but not in the pursuit of other goals.

Due to the nature of the fundamental rights themselves and the degree of their protection,
any law that derives individual rights guaranteed by the Constitution
out of judicial control in connection with any public
necessity, would provoke controversy over the constitutionality of
of the law. The Constitutional Court has already ruled that for this reason
the discretion of the National Assembly to limit judicial control,
provided in Art. 120 para. 2, will always be subject to judgment
constitutionality.

7. In making such an assessment, the Constitutional Court will always
be confronted with a conflict between constitutionally protected values ​​and
the need to choose between them. The choice between guaranteed by
The Constitution values ​​and the principled ruling on such a conflict would
was impossible unless the Constitutional Court created an unforeseen c
The Constitution is a preferential scale of the democratic ones guaranteed by it
values ​​of society. This means that the Court should give more
social and constitutional significance of equally guaranteed by
The Constitution and the rule of law are public values ​​and fundamental
principles of the state, which the Constitution itself does not contain.

As due to the lack of a constitutional scale of basic public
values, and because of the diversity of factual and legal situations,
where such laws can be adopted and applied, such an approach of
the court could hardly give a constitutional answer to
the need for a fair balance in their protection in the interests of
society.

8. In its Decision He 7 under c.d. 9/95 the Constitutional Court has ruled
that:

“The provision of Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria,
which allows the possibility by law to exclude certain categories
administrative acts of judicial review of legality must be
interprets restrictively and does not cover those acts which concern fundamental acts
constitutional rights. "

The opposite would mean the possibility of the rights they represent
constitutional value, be arbitrarily or unjustifiably taken away or
trampled under law or administrative practice. The opportunity
of Parliament to exclude any and all acts of the executive from
judicial control would violate the principles of legality, division of
authorities, the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms and the balance of the three authorities in
democratic state and would leave individuals defenseless against
arbitrariness.

9. In order to guarantee constitutional rights such a level of protection,
as required by the constitution, the judicial path for their protection must always be
to be open to the public. / see Emilia Drumeva, Constitutional Law,
St. Kliment Ohridski University Publishing House, Sofia 1998, pp. 635-7 /

This does not mean that these rights cannot be restricted in any way
degree, nor that they cannot be further regulated by law.
On the contrary, in order to ensure the effective exercise of fundamental rights,
the modern rule of law requires a clear legal regulation
the conditions under which rights may be exercised and limited. The planned
in laws restrictive measures are permissible only when they are clear and
detailed in law and without prejudice to the essential content of
the fundamental right itself. A condition for these restrictions is their imposition only
in the interests of the pursued other - also defensible - constitutional objectives and
the proportionality of the measures to the substance of the matter
right.

10. In accordance with these principles are also provided for in the European
Convention on Human Rights principles of admissibility of restrictions on
the rights guaranteed in it. In order to be able to assess compliance with these
requirements some control guarantees are needed.

According to the review in 1998. by the European Court of Human Rights case
51 пгорощов ап щетв у. Steese, Greek courts refused to register
association of persons with Macedonian national self-consciousness, because it was
suspected of undermining the territorial integrity and security of the state.
In assessing whether an infringement had been committed, the European Court examined
whether the restrictions, which “should be interpreted narrowly, in the sense that
their enumeration is exhaustive, and their definition is necessary
restrictive ”were imposed in the interests of protecting a“ legitimate aim ”and are
were “provided for by law” as required by Article 11/2 / of the ECHR.

The Court notes that “the way in which national law
defines this freedom as well as its practical application by
authorities reveal the degree of democracy in the country in question.
States certainly have the right to make sure that the goals and activities of
an association comply with the rules laid down in their
legislation. However, they must do so in a way that is compatible with
their obligations under the Convention and subject to review by the authorities of
The Convention. "

The Court notes that the exceptions provided for in Article 11/2 / ECHR “should be
interpreted strictly; and only convincing and compelling reasons can
justify restrictions on freedom of association. In determining whether
the need for this in the sense of art. 11/2 / really exists, the states have
limited discretion that goes hand in hand with the strict
European control both in terms of law and in terms of
the decisions under which this law has been applied, including those issued by
independent courts. "

The court “... must assess the alleged interference in the light of the case as
in general and to determine whether the reasons given by the authorities in order to intervene to
be justified are "relevant and sufficient". In doing so, he must
to ensure that the authorities have applied standards that comply with
the principles of Art. | and that the decision was based on an assessment acceptable to the Court
of the relevant facts. " Having considered the facts of the case, the Court
found that the restrictive measure had been imposed by the local courts in
the name of a legitimate aim, but that this measure was not proportionate and
necessary in a democratic society.

From this decision it is clear that even when it comes to goodwill
local authorities to protect national security, the European Court considers.
necessary to consider whether they really were present
relevant and sufficient reasons for imposing restrictions on
this legitimate goal. To make this assessment possible in terms of freedom.
of the association, this court, as well as any other controlling body, should
to have access to the information which imposes the restrictive measure in order to
consider whether it is necessary or not. This is even more important
for the assessment of violations of fundamental and irrevocable rights
which are not subject to restrictions in the interest of any purpose, and
the assessment of whether the required procedural ones have been provided
guarantees and domestic remedies.

11. In its case-law, the European Court of Human Rights has held that
The Convention does not always require judicial review of guarantees of rights. This one
a court has ruled that the state is not obliged to provide
judicial control over the dismissal of civil servants, but not that
the state is free not to provide domestic remedies to
expelled persons against the threat of torture.

W. To what extent the restriction of the right to defense and judicial control over
acts of the executive is admissible by the Constitution

1. The right of defense and access to judicial review are independent rights,
provided by the constitution as procedural guarantees for others
constitutional and legal rights of individuals. They cannot be considered
absolute - in themselves, but always in connection with specifically affected
a right that needs guarantees. The discussed law does not differentiate between
in no way the possibilities for affecting the guaranteed for foreigners
fundamental rights under the constitution from those provided for in the FRBA, which are indisputably
enjoy smaller warranties. On the contrary, the law leaves open the possibility
for equal uncontrolled infringement of both the right of residence and the right of residence
the basic constitutional provisions provided to foreigners residing in the country
rights equal to those of Bulgarian citizens.

2. The provisions of Art. 47 of the FRBA restriction is in the interest of the national
security - indisputably a constitutionally defensible value, for the protection of which
some, but not all, fundamental rights may be limited. It's hardly debatable,
for example, that freedom from torture is irrevocable and unlimited
constitutional law, but in the absence of any control there is no
no guarantee that the prohibition of torture will not be violated by
the expulsion of a person at risk of such treatment in the host country.
This prohibition is absolute both in the constitution and in those ratified by
Bulgaria international instruments, it is not subject to restriction, even
when national security is threatened. With the Law for interpretation of art. 47
the danger of disregarding this prohibition is also confirmed by
the immediate enforceability of the orders in question.

The restrictive measures provided by law are not measurable in relation to them
proportionality is not only not possible, but is explicitly excluded
the judgment of a court or other authority on the proportionality of the measure to
the fundamental rights affected by it.

CA The Constitutional Court has ruled that Parliament is not free to exclude
uch judicial control any administrative acts. Such an opportunity would
made meaningless the very division of powers and the function of the judiciary
as a controller of possible abuse of power.

In its Decision in case 5/97 under c.d. 25/96 The Constitutional Court has discussed
“The question of whether the legislator can arbitrarily exclude the respective
administrative act of judicial appeal. Is it enough for that
his judgment of expediency, or he must be guided by others

criteria for determining this exception. Assuming that
the legislator may, as appropriate, decide as he sees fit
the question of the exceptions under para. 2, will lead to the meaninglessness of the main
constitutional principle of judicial control over administrative
acts laid down in the texts of Art. 120 of the Constitution.

The Constitutional Court considers that the legislator can establish
exceptions from the court order for appealing against administrative acts only
when this exception does not prejudice the constitutionally recognized
fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens, or when another, higher, but
an explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be a priority
protected (such is the field of national security).
Without prejudice to fundamental constitutionally recognized rights and freedoms of
citizens is emphasized as a criterion for the exception under Art. 120, para. 2 of
The Constitution and in the decisions of the Constitutional. court under k. e. Lo 13 of 1993
г., к.д. dot 1995 ik. d.L0 18 0t 1995. ”

4. Exclusion from judicial control of individual administrative acts,
which infringe fundamental constitutional rights and freedoms ’when another, more
a supreme but explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be
protected as a matter of priority ”should also be proportionate and proportionate
with the different degree of admissibility of
restrictions on fundamental rights and freedoms - according to their value in
society.

5. The different degree of importance of the rights concerned also implies different ones
by degree of guarantee, including procedural, for their protection
in accordance with these principles, the Constitutional Court held that in the hypothesis
of Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution such exclusion (of judicial control)
is inadmissible when fundamental constitutional rights are affected - Decision
Ho 21 on cd. He 18 from 1995, reported by Judge Todor Todorov.

This principle is also confirmed in Decision He 11 of 30.1U.1998 under c.d. Ho 10/98 on
The Constitutional Court, reported by Judge Georgi Markov:

"The right to defense, including judicial protection, is a fundamental, universal and personal right
... it is irrevocable. ... Art. 56 of the Constitution has immediately
action and can act alone as a last resort
opportunity for citizens whose rights and legitimate interests have been violated ...
It should be borne in mind that it is the judiciary that is called upon by
The Constitution to protect the rights and legitimate interests of citizens -
Art. 117, para. | of the basic law. In the system of legal guarantees for protection
the rights and legitimate interests of citizens are the highest judicial,
because the court in its activity is independent and is subject only to the law - art.
117, para. 2 of the Basic Law.

"Art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution ... allows the exclusion of judicial control
by the legislator only in respect of certain administrative acts
in connection with administrative rather than contractual employment. But
and in the hypothesis of art. 120, para. 2 of the Constitution is such an exclusion

inadmissible when fundamental constitutional rights are affected - Decision Lo
21 on c.d. Lo 180t 1995. ”

This decision was rendered in connection with the constitutionally enshrined right
of labor and is even more valid with regard to the need for
protection and judicial control against possible infringements of rights which
are absolute and do not allow any exceptions or limitations, including
and for reasons of national security. They can't be
arguments why through a completely discretionary act of the administration
freedom from torture may be left without any guarantees
against violations, while the right to work enjoying more limited
protection, would enjoy a high degree of protection through judicial review.

6. In the absence of any other legal possibility for protection against encroachment
on fundamental rights, the court should be free to apply the Law on
foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria to the extent that it corresponds to
the constitution. With Decision He 3 of 1992 under c.d. 30/91 the Constitutional Court is
accepted that such an interpretation could not be made by the legislature. “Interpretation
of constitutional texts can be done in the law enforcement process
by judicial and administrative bodies ”. The law under discussion directly affects
the function of the judiciary as an independent guarantor of the rights of individuals.
An independent court is one that is not bound by the executive, or with which
to be one of the parties to the dispute, as well as who has institutional and legal
guarantees that he will not be subjected to any pressure in enacting
your decisions.

In this case we are not talking about pressure, but about a direct order of the National Assembly with
the powers of the court to exercise control over the act of enforcement
power, as well as on pronounced for two years by
courts acts. The possibility to announce issued judicial acts
for null and void and the instructions of the parliament on the manner of consideration and decision
of disputes make the very existence of the judiciary meaningless.

7. In terms of the general principle of separation of powers as is
the described interference of the legislature in the judiciary is inadmissible,
so it is imperative and inherent in this principle, the control that the judiciary
power by its nature exercises over the actions of the administration, ie.
of the executive branch.

8. Judicial control over administrative acts is constitutive
element of the rule of law. Emerged historically as an expression of the idea of
division and balancing of powers in the state, it is also an expression of subordination
of state power of the Constitution and laws. The courts in
democratic societies are called upon to provide legitimacy and guarantees to
citizens against arbitrariness precisely through the control they exercise
on the legality of the actions of the executive. IN
the development of the idea of ​​balance and complementarity of the three separate powers of the court is
assigned the role of arbitrator, authorized to annul illegal acts
of the executive branch. There is a real danger to citizens' rights

and for abuse of executive power if wrongfully and unreasonably
limits judicial control.

In its Decision He 13 of 1993 under cd. 13/93 The Constitutional Court is
ruled:

“The power under Art. 120, para. |! derives from the provision of Art. 4, para. Goth
The Constitution ... According to this provision, the Republic of Bulgaria is legal
country. It is governed by the Constitution and the laws of the country.
The meaning of this norm is in the complete binding of the exercise of
state power from the norms of law. "An expression of human rights
the rule of law is also a function of administrative justice,
provided to the courts as a means of ensuring the rule of law in
the field of public administration. It is called to protect itself
legality. Developed administrative justice is only in the legal
country. "Therefore, in the provision of Art. 120 contains one of
guarantees so that the norm of Art. 4, para. | only one constitutional
a wish of a declarative political nature. w

About two centuries ago, the US Supreme Court noted the Magritte y case.
Mafvop that every employee of the executive branch, even the State
the secretary has duties prescribed to him by law, and in their performance he is
independent, subject only to the laws. "It simply came to our notice then
a high-ranking official, but he is not above the law ... ”It would not be in
in line with the line of conduct of our political institutions,
continues the U.S. Air Force, and with the conduct of U.S. citizens if
any government official to whom they are assigned
obligations, is placed above compliance with the law in the implementation of these
obligations. " As for the guarantees for these requirements, the Supreme Court
also answers the question of who and when should monitor compliance with the laws and
constitution and to assess the actions of the Secretary of State.

"If it is a question of a document on which, according to the law, the state one
the Secretary shall issue an official copy, and on the basis of which against
the payment of ten cents the law gives one right, then what in
high-ranking employee can prohibit any one
person to defend in court their legal rights, or prohibit the court to
consider such a complaint or issue an act ordering it
obligation to be fulfilled without regard to the discretion of
the executive branch, but only by the laws and general principles of
the right? ”

The solution also touches on the other side of this problem - the issue of freedom of
citizens in the broadest sense of the word, their civil rights and
the right to defense: “If the person has a right and this right has been violated, whether
the laws in that country give him protection? ... The very essence of
civil liberty certainly consists in the right of every person
to seek the protection afforded by law at any time,

when it is damaged. One of the first duties of the government is
to provide this protection. "

Referring to one of the authors of the US Constitution -
Blackstone, the Court also proclaimed the principle enshrined in the relationship between
administration and citizens that “whenever there is a legal right, there is also
legal protection through a lawsuit or court act ... when that right is
violated ”.

Starting from these principled positions, the US Air Force concludes that all
actions, even of the Secretary of State, are subject to scrutiny by
the court when they affect civil rights. "When there is an obligation
prescribed by. the law and its implementation depend on the individual, it seems
it is absolutely clear that the person who is considered to be injured has the right to apply
to the laws of the state for protection ", the decision says.
"The US government has been called unequivocally many times
government of laws, not people. It certainly won't deserve that
high opinion if the laws do not provide protection in case of violation of one
existing law. "

These principles, although stated almost two centuries ago, are still valid today
every democratic and legal state.

9. The principle of separation of powers may be violated when one of
branches of government may interfere inadmissibly in constitutional
the recognized functions of another, or when a function is denied to one authority,
which is inherent in it. In both cases there is a real danger of
uncontrolled exercise of power. Both are affected by the law under discussion
aspect of this basic principle. In the first place we are talking about the independence of
the judiciary from> the legislature and the intervention of the latter in
the judicial and interpretative function of the courts, and secondly, the
the issue of control that the judiciary can and should
carried out in the acts of the administration.

10. The existence and functioning of a separate judiciary with
due to the need for an independent arbitrator in relations between citizens
and the state to monitor compliance with the law and distribute
justice. Therefore, according to Alexander Hamilton - one of the fathers of
the Constitution of the United States ", the judiciary will always be the most
a little dangerous for the rights in the constitution ... Although, from time to time
from the work of the courts may arise individual
injustice, the general freedom of the people can never be
endangered by this branch of government. " This is also stated in
Bulgarian legal literature: “Of all the three authorities, it is the (judicial)
independent and preserved from the influences of the other two ”(Em. Drumeva -
Constitutional Law, University Publishing House "St. Kliment Ohridski",
Sofia 1998, pp. 635-7 /.

The task facing any country in which rights and freedoms are respected
of the individual, is to create an order that guarantees these freedoms while guarding

citizens by other citizens and by the state itself. “A society in which
the rights of the individual are not guaranteed and in which it is not provided
the separation of powers, there is no constitution, ”says Article 16 of the French.
the Declaration of Human Rights of 1789 Today these words express
fundamental principle of constitutionalism in any legal and
democratic state.

The separation of powers is a means of organizing a state with which
aims to limit concentration and abuse of power by separating
the functions of the state between its separate structural units. At the base
on this principle stands the idea that absolute and unlimited power,
concentrated in one person or group of people, leads to a violation of the basics
of any rule of law. It is no coincidence that the separation of powers is denied by
totalitarian and dictatorial regimes. Montesquieu also notes that: “so
as any ruler is prone to abuse of power, one should
find such a way of state organization in which a power to
restrains others and vice versa. The basis of this doctrine, now adopted in
all democracies and rule of law, there is a need to ensure
individual freedom and to prevent abuse of power.

11. The careful analysis of the text of the Law for interpretation of art. 47 ZCHRB and
the reasons for it indicate an intention to expand the scope of art.
47 outside the hypotheses of imminent danger to national security and
raises questions about the compliance of the introduced new meaning of the provision with
the right of foreigners not to be expelled from the country ”except under conditions and
by order provided by law ”. The interpretative law constitutes an attempt at seizure
of the interpretive and judicial functions of the judiciary through
direct instructions and orders of the legislator regarding the subject and
the manner of its exercise, leading to the rendering of the judiciary and
revocation of its powers.