OPINION

SUBJECT: the request to establish unconstitutionality

of the Amendments and Supplements to the VAT Act under Const.D.He 7/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In accordance with the questions formulated in your definition by
March 29, 2001 in the constitutional case He 7/2001, I express the following
position:

1. In general, the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access
to the documents of the former state security (SG, issue 24/2001) no

contradicts the provisions of art. 4, para 1, art. 87, para. | and Article 88, para. from

The Constitution. The law is a two-vote vote held in two
separate meetings, which is in line with constitutional provisions.
After the second vote, the bill was submitted to the National Assembly
meeting of the leading commission (art. 68, para 2 of PODNS), cannot be
claims that the requirement of art. 87, para! of the Constitution.
The assessment of the constitutionality of the challenged law should be made
given only with a view to violating constitutional provisions, and not
of provisions of other normative acts, in which sense the permanent one is also
case law of the Constitutional Court (Decision No. 3/91, Decision No. 2/92, Decision No. 4/95
г., Реш.Ме 5/98 г.).

2. Act as a whole, as well as the challenged provisions separately,
do not contradict the provisions of art. 4, para 2, art. b, para 2, art. 32, art. 38 and
Article 56 of the Constitution (with the exception of 6 5 in its part regarding Art. 3, para 2,
0.76 ”of the Law). It provides mechanisms for the protection of
the dignity and rights of the individual - art. 2, art. 3, para. 2 and para. 4, art. for, art. b,
para 3, art. ba, para 4, art. 9, etc. The Act does not create any privileges,
based on any criteria (and not only those under Art. b, para 2 of
The Constitution). The publication of the report under Art. B, para 1 in conjunction with Art. 3, para 1,
item 3 of the Law cannot be qualified as “persecution” in the sense of
Article 38 of the Constitution. The names of the persons under Art. 3, para!, Item 2 of the Law shall not be
disclose because of their beliefs (which are irrelevant), a
only if those persons have been employed on a full-time or part-time basis
employees of the former State Security or the former Intelligence
management of the General Staff, or have benefited from them. Against
illegal inclusion of names of persons in the report under Art. 3, para!, item 3 of
The law provides for protection under the general claim procedure - art. Bg, which is why it is not
there is also a violation of Article 56 of the Constitution.

The need to verify certain categories of persons for

belonging to the former State Security and the former Intelligence

Management of the General Staff is a matter of expediency, which is

judged by the legislator - Resolution 10/97 of the Constitutional Court.

3. ZIDZDDBDS does not contradict also art. 8, art. 117 et seq. And art. 153 of
The Constitution. C 6 7, in its part regarding the new art. 4d, is provided
the activity of revealing the names of the Bulgarian citizens who were
full-time or part-time employees of the former State Security or the
the former "Intelligence" management of the> General Staff or
beneficiaries of the former State Security or of the former
Intelligence management of the General Staff to be carried out by a committee,
which is independent of the executive and is not broadcast by
representatives of the ruling or other political parties. In this
meaning> the legislator has also complied with the opinion of
The Constitutional Court, expressed in the reasons for Resh He 10/97
The powers of the chairman of the law provided for in art. 4d, para 2, item 2 of the Act
The Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General in no way affect the independence of
the judiciary. Regulating the manner of constituting
the commission under art. 4d of the Law so as to ensure its independence from
executive power is a matter of> legislative judgment for
expediency. There is no obstacle for the chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Chief
prosecutor to assign separate powers by special laws.
Indeed, these are constitutionally prescribed bodies, but theirs
powers are not regulated in detail and exhaustively in

The Constitution.

4. The provision of 6 5 of the AML / CFT Act in its part regarding art. 3, para 2,

0.f ”of the Law, as far as the words:“ either against it there is or there has been
initiated and subsequently terminated preliminary proceedings for
such a crime ”contradicts Article 4, paragraph |, Article 31, paragraph 3 and Article 32, paragraph | from
The Constitution. The fact that a person has been sued

criminal proceedings cannot be interpreted to his detriment after

the criminal proceedings were terminated. Criminal wrongdoing
of the conduct of the citizens is established only by an effective sentence.
Persons who have not been convicted and convicted by an effective sentence,
they should be in the same situation, whether or not they have been opposed
criminal proceedings or not. The provision also contradicts
Art. 17, para 2 of the Constitution, as it calls into question
the lawfulness and fairness of the relevant acts terminating
criminal proceedings ordered by the bodies of the independent

judiciary.