Honorable constitutional judges,

In connection with the provision provided to us by the Constitutional
court of March 15, 2001 opportunity, we express a constitutional opinion
case M 6/2001, instituted at the request of a group of MPs from
ХХХУМШ National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of
separate provisions of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for
2001 (SG, issue 108/2000).

Basically, the request is based on the constitutionally guaranteed one
independence of municipal budgets and the budget of the judiciary,
established in the provisions of art. 141, para. Tichl. 117, para. Zot Constitution of
Republic of Bulgaria. At the same time (and quite rightly so), by reference
in the case law of the Constitutional Court are set forth arguments, determining
the request, emphasizing some significant differences in
the independence of the budget of the judiciary and the budgets of the municipalities.

NAMRB will limit its opinion to the provisions of the LSBRB for
2001, referring to the municipalities and only to those of them with which they are established
the most significant contradictions in the regulations.

The budgets of the municipalities are not only independent, but are also separated from
the Republican. In addition, each municipality has its own separate and independent
budget, independent both for the other municipalities and for
in relation to the republican budget. In this aspect, the relationship
between the republican budget and the budgets of the municipalities must be
established definitively and in full for each municipality separately through
The State Budget Act for the respective year, in this case shi
through the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001

With the attacked provisions of 822 of the TFP of the State Budget Law for 2001 allowing
seizure of own revenues of municipal budgets in contradiction with
44, para. 4 of the LSB violate the principles of art. 141 of the Constitution and
in his three hypotheses. The four phases of the budget are axiomatic - drawing up,
acceptance, implementation and reporting. It could not be maintained that the budget is

 

financial sources determined by law in accordance with Art. 141,
para 2 of the Constitution. Seizure of legally realized own
revenues from a separate budget, regardless of their nature is
constitutionally inadmissible. Such sources are not explicitly mentioned among
the sources forming the revenue part of the republican budget,
defined in the Law on the Bulgarian State Budget, as well as in Art
the provision of para 3 is in contradiction with art. 9, item 1 of EHMS - the bodies of
local governments have the right to sufficient own funds, with
which can be disposed of freely in the exercise of powers
you are.

By sharing the findings set out in the request with regard to
the amount and nature of the subsidies under Article 9 of the State Budget Law for 2001, will be
let us emphasize the lack of a legally defined amount of
assigned state revenues for each individual municipality. Municipalities,
as we have emphasized, they do not have an aggregate budget, therefore the provision of Art. 8
of the State Budget Law for 2001 is insufficient to ensure compliance with Art. 42, para 4
from ZUDB. In the sense of this provision of the LSBB, the amount of the transferred
government revenue (as well as the amount of all other financial resources
support) must be determined for each municipality separately. By
In essence, in this case there is a refusal of the National Assembly within the meaning of
Decision M 17/1995 of the Constitutional Court on k, d. M 13/95

There is no constitutional obligation of the municipality to
performs functions in the field of social assistance. That's right
on the contrary, the guarantee of constitutionally irrevocable civil rights is
care and obligation of the state. Of course, no one excludes
the opportunity for municipalities to participate on their own initiative or by virtue of
law in various forms of social assistance to its citizens-
social patronage, public canteens, etc. But these are additional
forms in accordance with the specifics and capabilities of the respective
territorial community falling within the scope of competence as matters of
local character - ie outside the regulated obligations for aid under
UPR and social benefits under the SLA. In fact, the SLA itself refers to as
one of the sources of support and the municipal budget. In our opinion, however
these funds provided through municipal budgets should be
provided in full through a subsidy from the national budget - such as
expenses for performance of indisputably state functions, according to art. 54,
al. 2 of LLSGA.