Gentlemen judges,

By order of 13 February 2001 on “the above
constitutional case The Constitutional Court has allowed the request to be considered
of 56 MPs from the 38th National Assembly and a court panel from Sh
Division "of" the Supreme "Administrative Court" to declare 0 for
unconstitutional all provisions of the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria / SG, iss. 108 of 29 December 2000

1. The first request raises the question of admissibility
Is it up to the National Assembly to pass laws to interpret existing ones?
laws.

It is pointed out that the provision of Art. 84 of the Constitution provides that
The National Assembly adopts, amends and repeals laws, but does not envisage them
The National Assembly to be able to interpret the laws. It is also pointed out that with Art. 8 from
The Constitution establishes the principle of separation of powers ... And according to Art.
117, para. 2, the judiciary shall be independent in the exercise of its assignment
judicial function. And the latter derives from “enshrined in Art. 124 and
125, para. | from the Constitution the competences of the Supreme Court of Cassation and
The Supreme Administrative Court to exercise supreme judicial supervision over
implementation of accurate and uniform application of the laws ", it is said literally
in exactly the same way in the two requests referred to the Constitutional Court.

The Supreme Bar Council does not have a unanimous opinion on this position
question.

On the one hand, the understanding expressed by the importers of both is accepted
requests for declaring the unconstitutionality of the Law for interpretation of art.
47 of the Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria. Support this understanding
points out that the National Assembly is not authorized to give so-called authentic interpretation of

laws, as such a power is not provided for in the Constitution for
unlike the previous Bulgarian constitutions, in which the issue was
explicitly settled. In the constitution of the Kingdom of Bulgaria in Art. 44 was
provided that the National Assembly had the right to interpret the true meaning of
every law. "According to the constitutions of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the power to give"
binding on all interpretations of the laws »belonged respectively to
The Presidium of the National Assembly / Art. 35, item 4 of the Constitution of 1947 / i
of the State Council / Art. 93, item 8 of the Constitution of 1971 /.

According to another understanding, the silence of the Constitution on
power of the National Assembly to interpret the laws adopted by it no
means that it cannot interpret its own will. It is not in the Constitution
assigned to another constitutional body to give an authentic interpretation of
the laws. There is no ban on the National Assembly doing this. Therefore not
there is no constitutional obstacle for the National Assembly to interpret itself
the laws created by him. By the way, the term authentic interpretation means that
it is given precisely by the one who has expressed the legislative will in one way or another
degree vague to explain exactly what he meant.

The Constitution does not instruct the supreme courts to give
mandatory for all interpretation of the laws. The judicial function most
generally speaking, it is necessary to resolve a specific legal dispute, to impose it
a specific sanction for a specific offense and in a word to rule on
specific issues referred to a judicial authority.
The judicial function does not consist in creating universally valid norms
for state bodies, for institutions and departments and for all legal and
individuals. That would mean that the judiciary is
assigned legislative functions. And this is not provided by Art. 120 and art. 125, para. 1
of the Constitution. In these provisions it is said only that the supreme courts.
exercise supreme judicial oversight over the accurate and uniform application of laws
from all courts. Therefore, since the lower courts are
ruled their acts appealed to the Supreme Courts, the latter under
the force of the control exercised by them according to the judicial procedure laws
rule on the correctness of these acts, seeking to harmonize
case law with its decisions - confirmatory or revocable. IN
however, in no case does the Constitution empower supreme courts without them
referred to a specific litigation, to give universal validity to the judicial authorities
instructions on the interpretation and application of laws. That would mean to be
limited freedom of internal judicial conviction. It is the main one
a prerequisite for the independence of the judiciary, which is independence not only
in relation to the other authorities, but it is also a hierarchical independence.
The opposite understanding contradicts precisely the one established by art. 117, para. изр.1 от
The Constitution is a principle relied on by the petitioners.
This provision in its second sentence provides that judges, judicial
jurors, prosecutors and investigators are subject only to the law; i.e.,
the courts are obliged to obey only the instructions of interpretation
and the application of the law given by the Supreme Court of Cassation in particular

case, which was returned to them for reconsideration.

essentially in the light. of the above
the provisions of Art. 97 of the Judiciary Act, c
feature of its para 2, and art. 45 of the Law on the Supreme Administrative Court. On
practice with these provisions are assigned to the supreme legislative courts
functions.

2. As for the discussion of> the content of the self
interpretive law, we find that the claims are pointless, as is the case
is also the law itself following the decision Ho 4 of 23 February 2001 under
constitutional case He 12/2000 of the Constitutional Court. With this decision,
as reported, the request of 55 MPs from the 38th was rejected
National Assembly. to declare the unconstitutionality of Art. 47, para. | from
The Law on Foreigners of the Republic of Bulgaria and on the Establishment of
its incompatibility with the provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
human rights and fundamental freedoms. The meaning of this legal provision is
clear - the orders under section | are not subject to appeal from Chapter U of the law, p
which coercive administrative measures are imposed immediately
related to the security of the country In the cited decision of
The Constitutional Court set out the reasons in favor of understanding that this
provision is not unconstitutional and is not inconsistent with the provisions of
European Convention. In this regard, we will only allow ourselves to add that
according to art. 12, item 3 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights / c
force for Bulgaria from March 23, 1976 - SG, iss. 43 of 28 May 1976 / the right of
freedom of movement may be restricted by a law to protect
national security, public order, public health and morals or
the rights and freedoms of others.