OPINION
of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Financial Control

SUBJECT: Order of the Constitutional Court of 15 March
2001, with attached the request of a group of MPs, with which
The National Assembly is constituted as a party under c.d. M6 / 2001, for
establishing the unconstitutionality of provisions of the Law on
the state budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (promulgated, SG No. 108/2000)

d.)

At a meeting held on 29 March 2001, the Commission on
budget, finance and financial control discussed the definition of
The Constitutional Court of 15 March 2001, with the request of
group of MPs, with which the National Assembly is
constituted as a party under cd. M6 / 2001, establishing the
unconstitutionality of provisions of the State Act
budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (promulgated, SG No. 108/2000).
The Commission has adopted the following principles in relation to
the legal provisions challenged before the Constitutional Court:

1. On the legal nature of the annual law
State budget:

The annual law on the state budget is largely “a law
in a formal sense ”insofar as it is accepted as provided in c
The Constitution provides for the adoption of laws by the National Assembly.
However, the Constitution does not prohibit or restrict
inclusion in this law of legal norms regulating certain
public relations related to the implementation of the state
budget. In this direction is the long-standing legislative practice of
National Assembly.

2. Concerning the budget of the judiciary and the Supreme Judiciary
advice

The budget of the judiciary and, in particular, of the Supreme Judiciary
council is part of the state budget. The National Assembly, such as
legislative authority is competent to determine its structure, c
incl. to differentiate or not the budget of the SJC in a separate position within
of the general budget of the judiciary.

3. Regarding the compilation of municipal budgets:

3.1. The current constitutional framework stipulates that the authorities
of local government perform the functions of
decentralized government, they are bodies that
exercise public power and are part of the state. Their
powers are part of public authority and do not arise primarily
outside the country. In this sense, the existence of legally regulated
coordination mechanism between the different management units of
the state, incl. and municipal authorities, within the general
budget process is not unconstitutional.

3.2. The provision of certain conditions and requirements in
the law on the annual state budget related to the relationship
between> the republican budget and the budgets of the municipalities,
including the provision of budget subsidies, does not infringe
the autonomy of local self-government and the independence of
municipal budgets. This is because of these conditions and requirements
aim to strengthen budgetary discipline and ensure
the lawful spending of the provided by the state
funds. In this way, higher constitutional principles are protected
and values ​​such as the continuous operation of those provided for in
Constitution bodies, compliance with the law, and for
balanced development of the different regions of the country and support
of the territorial bodies and activity through the financial, credit and
the investment policy of the state (Article 20 of the Constitution).

From this point of view, it is not unconstitutional either
if in the annual state budget / resp. annexes thereto, adopted
on the basis of the transitional and final provisions of the law / se
provide specific methodologies for determining the budget
relations of the republican budget with the budgets of
municipalities for the respective year. This is exactly what was done with

the attacked Annex 3 to the State Budget Law for 2001. It is in the law for
the annual state budget should be determined in detail and
flexible enough these relations, given the dynamics of
economic life and financial condition of the state.

3.3. According to the Constitution, the Council of Ministers has
exclusive right of legislative initiative to submit to
The National Assembly of the draft annual state budget.
Therefore, it is not unconstitutional to require municipalities to
send their draft budgets to the Minister of Finance, who shall
draws up the final proposals for supporting the municipalities under
the form of general and targeted subsidies and unallocated expenditure from
the republican budget and to submit them to the Council of Ministers for
consideration.

3.4. The provision of special rules in the law for the annual
state budget, regulating certain relations, conditions
or parameters in the compilation and implementation of municipal
budgets does not contradict the Law on Municipal Budgets, which is
part of the budget legislation and is subject to the general ones
principles set out in it. In this sense, the principle is not violated
of the rule of law, established in Art. 4, para. | of the Constitution as
is stated in the request to the Constitutional Court.

On the basis of the above arguments, the Commission considers that
the request to declare the attacked unconstitutional
provisions of the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria Act for
2001 is unfounded and should not be respected.

The opinion was adopted by 6 votes to 4.