SUBJECT: the request of a group / 54 / MPs from
ХХХУШ National Assembly to announce in full
the unconstitutionality of the Amendment Act and
addition to the Law on Access to Documents of
the former State Security / prom. SG, no. 24 from
13.03.2001 /, or alternatively to be established
the unconstitutionality of 86, 57, art. 4d, art. 4e, 63,
Art. 2, 65, Art. 3, para 1, items 1, 88, 621, 623 and 625 of the same
law.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The request to declare the unconstitutionality of
The Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents
of the former State Security as a whole or alternatively, to
established the unconstitutionality of 66, 7, art. 4d, art. 4e, 63, art. 2,

85, art. 3, para 1, items 1, 88, 621, 823 and 625 of the same law, was raised by
group / 54 / MPs from XXXUS National Assembly.

With a ruling of March 29, 2001, the Constitutional
the court allowed the request for consideration on the merits and constituted it
National Security Service - Ministry of Interior as one of the stakeholders
parties to the case.

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE REQUEST:

The request of the group of MPs was made
by a fit constitutional subject within the meaning of Art. 150, para. from
The Constitution. Its examination is within the competence of
The Constitutional Court, according to Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution and
Article 17, paragraph | of the Constitutional Court Act.

IN THE ESSENCE OF THE REQUESTS:

I consider that, although admissible, the request is unfounded,
insofar as the Law for amendment adopted by the National Assembly and
supplement to the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State
security does not> contradict the Constitution My legal
Considerations in support of this opinion are the following:

REGARDING THEIR FORMAL MOTIVATIONS:

In general, the invoked ones are reduced to the statement
to the claimants that the National Assembly had violated the principles of
the legislative process, which is in contradiction with Art. 4, para. 1, art. 87, para.
1, art. 88, para. 11 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. The request in
this part of it concerns the procedure for the adoption of the AAS of the VAT Act by
National Assembly. Given the fact that the right of legislative
only MPs and the Council of Ministers have an initiative,
I can only express a general opinion on the above arguments of
seekers.

The group of MPs cannot justify
conclusion that the law is unconstitutional, claiming that it exists
contradiction with the Constitution due to violation and non-observance of
the procedural rules for the adoption of regulations,
established in the Law on the normative acts of the LNA / and the Regulations for
the organization and the activity of the National Assembly LODNS).
Applicants develop the thesis that this indirectly leads to

unconstitutional, as it was a violation of the principle
for a state governed by the rule of law, established in Art. 4, para 1. It is exactly the opposite
the permanent practice of the Constitutional Court, expressed in a number of its
solutions e.g. Decision Xe3 / 1992 on a constitutional case
Xe30 / 1991, decision Xo5 / 1998. on constitutional case Xe2 / 1998 and
etc., which states that: “Failure to comply with procedural rules of
The Rules for the organization and activity of the National Assembly are not
violation of constitutional norms. The Constitutional Court does not
discuss such violations. "

In addition, the claim of the claimants that it was submitted
"Apocryphal" or "mysterious" bill because they were not in it
marked neither names nor there were signatures could not justify
the thesis that the bill adopted in the second vote, "was
fundamentally different from that adopted in the first ballot ”, f
insolvent. Applicants are motivated only by the volume of
the bill, the number of paragraphs in it and the number of pages, on
which was located. In doing so, they are challenging the constitutional ones
powers of MPs in the course of the legislative
process to make changes to the bills in question first
and second reading. In this way the right of the People's is denied
assembly as a legislative body to amend or supplement the submitted
bills in the course of their discussion.

Based on the above considerations, I consider that
there is no contradiction of the AIS of the VAT Act of Art. 4, para 1, Art. 87, para. and
Article 88, paragraph | of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

ON THEIR ESSENTIAL MOTIVATIONS:

The essential “considerations of” are unfounded
the claimants, according to which the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law
for access to> documents of the former State Security
ZIDZDDADS / is unconstitutional from the point of view of
its substantive part.

I consider that there is no contradiction between the texts of
the law and the Constitution, as they are fully in line with the basic
constitutional right of society to receive information that
is of interest to him. The right of access to information
corresponds to the obligation of the state to regulate the order in laws
and the conditions for exercising this right.

An expression of this obligation and of public necessity
from regulating the right of access to information appear as
The Law on Access to Public Information and the Law on Access to Public Information.

Also a number of international acts on which
The Republic of Bulgaria is a party, creating an obligation to protect the right
access to information. Fundamental international law
documents governing the principles underlying the law
of access to information are the Universal Declaration of the Rights of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
The Convention on the Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of
Europe and Recommendation K (81) 19 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe of 25.11.1981

At its first session in 1946, the General Assembly of
The United Nations unanimously adopts a resolution on freedom of information,
which reads: “The right to information is a fundamental human right and is
a condition for all the freedoms to which the United Nations aspires. "

In this context, the constitutional legislator has settled
the right of everyone to access the information contained therein
the state bodies, having regulated this right in art. 41, para. 2 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. This right is recognized to everyone
it is comprehensive and covers all information contained in y
all bodies except those defined by the Constitution as
restricted information.

From what has been said so far, it is clear that the right to information
defends many different interests. Interpreting the will of
the constitutional legislator The Constitutional Court in its judgment Ho
7/96 has expressed the thesis that in practice it is possible the emergence of
conflict of interest, but the basic will is based on the idea of
balance of these interests.

Therefore, the thesis cannot be accepted in any way
to the seekers that “the philosophy, spirit, and texts of the law are direct
directed against national security and statehood ”.

The public announcement of persons who have worked in
the special security bodies (DS, GA General Directorate and GA RO) of
the totalitarian state is an expression of the right of citizens and society
to receive information of particular interest and is
related to the formed public consciousness of reprehensibility of
the activity of these structures.

The disclosure of the names of Bulgarian citizens who
were full-time or part-time associates of the former State Security, the General Staff of the General Staff and

RO of GV in compliance with the norm of Art. 2 of the Access to
public information, which text introduces a legal definition
of the concept of "public information". That is why these
data are from the category of information that is related to the public
life in the Republic of Bulgaria and enables citizens to be
form their own opinion.

Last but not least, it should be noted that
according to the Decision of the National> Assembly, “the information about
the organization, methods and means in the implementation of
the specific tasks of the State Security bodies, as well as
the intelligence information of those authorities relating to or related to
period until October 13, 1991, are not considered to constitute a state
secret within the meaning of points 19 and 20 of the List of Facts, Information and Information
the objects that constitute a state secret of the Republic of Bulgaria
(promulgated, SG, issue 31 of 1990; amended, issues 90 and 99 of 1992).

The other essential considerations are also unfounded,
highlighted by the applicants related to the characterization of the created ones
with the law commissions - under art. 4, para. | and under Art. 4d, para. | from ZID ZDDBDS
as "political bodies". The approach adopted by the legislator for
their structuring in no way contradicts
the basic principles for the division of
authorities (Art. 8), as well as with the constitutional principles enshrined in Art
Chapter UT of the Constitution, relating to the judiciary.

These commissions are structured as bodies with a special status
while respecting the principle of separation of powers. Because
the verification procedure for disclosing the names of the Bulgarians
citizens who were full-time or part-time employees of the former
The DS, the RO of the HQ and the IRO of the GV, should be guaranteed from the point of view
of its independence and objectivity, and hence with a view to guaranteeing it
the truth of the established facts, the commissions are not in the structure
neither the legislative, nor the judicial, nor the executive
power. This eliminates the danger of political and
public discrediting, as well as attempts to manipulate and
extortion of individual citizens by distorting the facts.
> Strictly> regulated rules have been created to guarantee
the independence of the authorities to carry out the relevant inspection; and
legal guarantee of the constitutional right of the inspected
persons to defend themselves against incorrect decisions of the authorities under
the inspection.

In support of the above is the fact that the National Assembly with
Decision of 28.03.2001 (promulgated SG, issue 32/2001) has elected five
members of the commission under art. 4, para. | from the AIS of the VAT Act upon proposal
of five different parliamentary groups. Therefore, this committee will
be an impartial body that in no way could
to pursue "narrow party goals of those who defined it."
The manner of composition of the commission, as well as the overall regulation in
the law create sufficient guarantees to achieve the objectives of
the law under the conditions of equality and objectivity.

The claim of the claimants is also unfounded
in connection with the formation of the commission under Art. 4 g, para. | from ZID
The VAT Act, which is expected to consist of representatives,
appointed by the President, the Chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General.

First of all, it should be noted that the state
chapter, according to art. 92, para. and Article 93 of the Constitution, is elected directly
by the people, embodies the unity of the nation and in no way
is subordinate to the legislature and the executive. The determination
of the chairman of this commission by the president is a factor that
contributes to increasing the public authority of the body
guarantee of its political independence.

Next, I want to note that with the determination
of members of the commission - judges and prosecutors from the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Court of Cassation under
in no way extends> constitutionally> defined
powers of the Chairman of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Prosecutor General. On the contrary,
the representatives of the judiciary in this commission are another
guarantee the impartiality of this body, as their status
in the context of the independence of the judiciary, combined with the high
their professionalism, as well as their obligation in carrying out
their functions to be subject only to the law will lead to the most
high degree on the one hand to achieve the objectives of this law, and on
on the other hand, will protect the rights and legitimate interests of citizens,
legal entities and the state.

The commission under art. 4d, para. | of the VAT Act, is not a body of
the executive branch, due to which the statement of
claimants that “judicial authorities appoint from their system
other executive bodies ”. Not for the first time in Bulgaria
legal system, bodies with a special status are established, independent of
the judiciary, the executive and the legislature, for which they can
the following examples are given: NRTC under the Radio Act and
television and the Commission for Protection of Competition under the Law on

protection of competition and others. Such a body is also provided for in
the draft Law on Personal Data Protection adopted at first reading.
Also, a permanently established practice is the appointment of
magistrates in the central election commissions to conduct
parliamentary and presidential elections, including the appointment in
these commissions are carried out by bodies outside the judiciary, such as
are the President and the National Assembly.

That is why I believe that bib 7 does not contradict in any way
way of art. 8, Art. 117 et seq. And Art. 153 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria.

Next in the exhibition of the group of folk
representatives are developed motives with which it is done “automatically
transfer ”of the affiliation of the heads of the bodies under
Article 4e, paragraph | on the manner of implementation of the legal and official ones
obligations of their subordinates who qualify as
"Fulfillment of party orders". Moreover - it is said that
"The working groups will not be bodies of catharsis, announcing
objective truth, because they will make a subjective judgment about one
past activity of the Bulgarian citizens ”.

Logically, the legislator has provided for the creation of these
working groups in the departments where the respective ones are kept
information funds. It should also be borne in mind that
the members of these working groups will be employees of ministries
and services which, pursuant to> legal provisions,
regulating their status are politically neutral and which in
performance of their service are governed by the law and the protection of
the rights, legitimate interests and freedoms of citizens - legally
requirement regulated in the LMI, ZOVSRB and ZDS.

In addition, those referred to in Art. 4d, para. | working groups in
ministries and services will consist of employees with rich
professional experience who will be required to do an analysis of
the documents of DS, RU - GS and RO of GV in compliance with
the requirements of the AIS ZDDBDS. The case concerns the establishment of
facts and circumstances based on specific documents
referred to in Article 5 of the law, which have their legal
certain material and formal probative force with respect to
of the circumstances to which they relate. Therefore, without
qualified assistance to these employees in
the highly specialized matter, the work of the two commissions under Art. 4,
al. | and Art. 4d, para. | ZID ZDDBDS would be very difficult and would

there were prerequisites for the emergence of risks to the national
security of the Republic of Bulgaria.

It should be borne in mind that the working groups will
perform only the preparatory activity for the processing of this
large amount of information and will not make disclosure decisions
of information, as the law provides for decisions to be made
only by the commission under art.

Summarizing the above, we can conclude that
that the texts regulating the status and activity of the commissions
under Art. 4, para and under Art. 4d, para 1, as well as the working groups under Art. 4e, under
in no way contradict the principles and texts of
The Constitution.

I also consider the applicants' considerations to be unfounded
the law is in contradiction with art. 4, para. 2, Art. 32, para. 2 art. 38 and art. 56 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as well as the principles set out
in the preamble.

Next, the applicants have developed the thesis of
damage to the good name, honor and dignity of citizens.

The constitutional legislator uses the term
"Dignity" as a term in various texts of the Constitution, through
which determines the principles for the regulation of the legal
position of the personality. In a democratic society, personality is
supreme value and its rights as well as its security are a measure
about the degree and nature of democracy. Along with the rights of the individual
is placed in the preamble of the Constitution and human dignity.
The constitutional legislator is already in the preamble of the Constitution
brought to the fore three supreme principles - the rights of the individual,
its dignity and its security. In this context, dignity
should be seen as a constitutional concept filled with
legal content and should be separated from its understanding as
moral category, which reveals a certain philosophical and
political content. Listed in the statement of the applicants
arguments in this direction are entirely based on the understanding of the concept
as a moral category. It is for this reason that it is difficult to
point out. legal arguments / counter-arguments /, and even less to
draw and present legal conclusions.

In the legislation on the right to information,
as is the case with the AML / CFT Act, the legislator has complied with
the requirement to guarantee the fundamental rights proclaimed by

The Constitution, namely the rights and reputation of citizens,
national security, public order, public health and morality.

Initially, belonging to the former State
security does not affect the reputation of the inspected persons. Theirs
activity was legally regulated. Undoubtedly, a big one
part of the collaborators of the former State Security are
carried out an activity which even today corresponds to the moral norms -
prevention and detection of terrorist acts, actions,
directed against the territorial integrity and national security of
Bulgaria, etc. This is confirmed by the fact that the law itself
protects those collaborators of the former State Security who
continue to cooperate with modern security services -
Art. 3, para. 2 of the AIS of the VAT Act. Their behavior is clearly not considered
for immoral and in this regard, one of the virtues of the law is that it
does not contain any evaluation moment and does not in any normative order
imposes a certain moral conclusion.

The purpose of the law is through the timely announcement of
sufficient data on the full-time and part-time associates of the former DS
and the former General Directorate of the General Staff, every citizen to be able to judge from
point of view of their own morals and views in each individual
whether the activity carried out was worthy of respect or not
was reprehensible. The opinion compiled on the basis of this category
public information will enable citizens to
form their civil position.

I also find the claim of the applicants that unfounded
6 2a, para. 2 of the Additional Provisions of the AIS ZDDBDS, announcing
“Carrying out activity as a full-time or part-time associate of
There is an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service
incompatible with holding a public office within the meaning of para.
1, item 1 ”, contradicts Article 6 of the Constitution.

This issue is resolved differently in different countries
way, in view of the established “national regulatory and
institutional frameworks and national traditions.

Introduced with the hypothesis of (2a, para 2 norm of
incompatibility between posts and activities is not an expression of
restricting the rights of citizens in the context of Article 6 of
The Constitution is an expression of the establishment and legal consolidation of
the constitutionally established principles of a democratic state,
proclaimed in the preamble of the Constitution. The cited norm
of the AIS, the VAT Act gives the right to choose to each citizen whether to borrow

one or another public office, respectively whether to perform
public activity, or to cooperate with the security authorities.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Please disregard what the group has done
MPs' representatives request for the full announcement of 9 of
the unconstitutionality of the Act amending and supplementing
The Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security / prom.
SG, no. 24 of 13.03.2001 /, or alternatively to be established
the unconstitutionality of 66, 47, art. 4d, art. 4e, 63, art. 2, 65, art.3,
para 1, items 1, 88, 821, 823 and 625 of the same law.