DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In connection with your constitutional ruling of 13 February 2001
Case He 2/2001, by which you admitted the merits of the request of 56
MPs from XXXUS National Assembly and a panel of judges from Sh
Division "of" the Supreme "Administrative Court for" announcement 0 for
unconstitutional all provisions of the Law on Interpretation of Article 47 of
The Law on Foreigners in the Republic of Bulgaria, prom. SG, issue 108 of December 29, 2000
d, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as an interested party provides

the following opinion:

1. Legal doctrine defines interpretation as a process of precision
clarification of the legislative will, expressed in the legal norm. In case of
the interpretation comes from the body that issued the relevant normative act, then we are talking about
authentic interpretation of the law, ie in the most general terms it can be summarized that by

thus the body that has the rule-making competence to adopt

the relevant norm has clarified its actual content, which due to
one reason or another has remained unclear to the judiciary and
law enforcement authorities.

In Art. 84, para of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria regulates the powers of
The National Assembly, as indisputable is the fact that they are not listed
exhaustively. Article 84, paragraph 1, item 1 states that the National Assembly “accepts,
amends, supplements and repeals the laws ”, that is, in essence, this text states that
it is authorized by the Constitution through laws to adopt universally binding
rules of conduct to regulate the relevant public relations,
according to his will formed in a strictly defined order. There is no such power
delegated by the Constitution to either of the other two authorities.

On the other hand, in Art. 124 and art. 125 of the Constitution are regulated
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court for
exercising supreme judicial supervision over the accurate and uniform application of.
the laws. According to Art. 84, para 1, item | and Art. 95, item 3 of the Judiciary Act,
the general meeting of the respective board of the Supreme Court of Cassation,
respectively of the Supreme Administrative Court rules with interpretatives
decisions in case of incorrect or contradictory practice of the courts. In this
hypothesis we are again faced with a case of official interpretation of the legal
norms, but performed by a judicial authority in the implementation of
the competencies assigned to him.

It is alleged that the Law on Interpretation of Art. 47 of the Aliens Act c
The Republic of Bulgaria enters into contradiction with the provisions of Art. 8 of the Constitution
principle of separation of powers, because clarifying the exact meaning of
legal norms is a judicial function inherent in higher justice
bodies that are independent within the meaning of Art. 117, para 2 of the Constitution. It follows
to bear in mind, however, that the possibility of the National Assembly to carry out.
An authentic interpretation of its akgos derives directly from the provision of Art. 84,
para 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria as an expression of its exclusive competence to.
creates by law generally binding legal norms of high order, respectively yes.
clarifies how they should be applied. This power is immanent
embedded in the rule-making activity itself, due to which the legislator did not consider

it is necessary to include it explicitly in the text of the Constitution.

As for the indicated possibility of the colleges of the SAC and the SCC to
pronounce with interpretative decisions in case of incorrect or contradictory practice,
then their activity derives from their hierarchical place in the system of
courts and differs from the authentic interpretation in its essence and
functions. In one case, the rule-making body clarifies its actual
will at the time of adoption of the relevant act, while in the other hypothesis is
there is a mental activity for secondary clarification of the will of the legislator, p
the help of the institutes of law, of the logical, grammatical and others
rules. Authentic interpretation aims to materialize
the actual will of the authority which issued the act in the relevant adequate text,
while in the other case the aim is to ensure the accurate and uniform application of
laws by the courts for reasons in the judiciary. In this
meaning precisely the denial of the right of the National Assembly to exercise
interpretation of their own acts would run counter to
the principle of separation of powers enshrined in the Constitution, as
as the opposite means to enable the judiciary along the way
of interpretation to replace the actual will of the legislator, that is, to
creates new legal norms - a power that it does not have under
Constitution. Hence a constitutional guarantee against a possible one
abuse of the right to an authentic interpretation of the laws should be
seeks in the powers of the> Constitutional Court to> establish
unconstitutionality of these acts, and not in the very denial of the right
of authentic interpretation.

2. With regard to the allegation of contradiction of the Interpretative Law with
Article 6, item 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Rights
freedoms (ECHR), it should be emphasized that according to this text, any person, under
determination of his civil rights and obligations or in the presence of
any criminal charge against him is entitled to a fair and
public hearing of his case within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial
a court established in accordance with the law. According to the case law of
European Court of Human Rights, the scope of this provision is
limited to the cases where the court hears disputes concerning rights or
obligations of a private civil nature (agge: Kshrevep of 16 July 1971

(d) or on the merits of criminal charges. Both the text and

the practice of applying Article 6, paragraph of the ECHR relate exclusively to
civil and criminal proceedings. In rare cases / related to rights,
whose effect occurs in the private civil law sphere such as the right to
property or right to practice a certain profession or activity /,
The European Court of Human Rights has held that Article 6 is also applicable to
administrative proceedings Its applicability in these rare cases is
conditioned by the cumulative presence of at least two conditions, namely: a) c
the national legal order provides for the possibility of challenging this right
and 6) the signs of a private civil nature of the right to have
obvious predominance over the signs of public law character. For example,
due to the lack of these conditions, Article 6 of the ECHR is inapplicable in the field of
emigration law or in respect of tax proceedings / age Aree from
17.12.1976 /

On an even greater basis, as far as regulated by the disputes
interpretive law public relations are related to the application of
coercive administrative measures against foreigners for reasons of
national security, it follows that the provision of Article 6 para is from the ECHR
not applicable in this case.

3. With regard to the allegation that the fourth and fifth sentences of Article
only Interpretative law frustrate the right of appeal of citizens, follows
to note that the exclusion of the possibility for the court to collect evidence of
the facts and circumstances which motivated the issuing authority derive from
the exclusion of the possibility for the Court to assess and rule on
the essence of the grounds for issuing the order. In this regard, relevant
are the arguments presented by us in item 2. In the same context, it should be emphasized that
ECHR provisions, as well as the case law of the European Court of Human Rights
do not obstruct the domestic legal order of the States Parties
The Convention excludes judicial review and adjudication on the merits of
the measure imposed by an administrative act for reasons of national
security. This fact does not mean that the foreign nationals concerned are
completely deprived of the general right to defense. As noted by the Constitutional
court in its decision Ho. 18 of 14.11.1997 on constitutional case 12/97,
“The provision of art. 120, para 2 sh Be of the Constitution does not exclude the right of

the courts to rule on the nullity of the unappealable

administrative acts. and therefore the fourth and fifth sentences of Article
the only of the disputed interpretative law are not in conflict with

the constitutionally established right to protection of citizens.