JUDGMENT № 1
Sofia, 26 March 2002
constitutional case № 17/2001
Judge-Rapporteur Rumen Yankov
( Promulgated, SG No. 35 of 5 April 2002) 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov - Rapporteur, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on December 5, 2001 at the request of 50 MPs from the XXXIX National Assembly in order to establish the unconstitutionality of part of the provisions of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Radio and Television (ZIDZRT) - promulgated, SG, No. 96 of 2001, amended, SG No. 112/2001 and their inconsistency with the European Convention on Transfrontier Television - promulgated, SG No. 32/1999.

By a ruling of 15 January 2002, the Constitutional Court allowed for consideration on the merits only the request for unconstitutionality of certain texts of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

The National Assembly (NA), the Council of Ministers (CoM), the Bulgarian National Television, the Bulgarian National Radio, the Council for Electronic Media (CEM), the Communications Regulation Commission (CRC) and the Bulgarian Media Coalition (BMC) have been constituted as stakeholders.

Within the set term, opinions were received from the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the CEM, the CRC and the BMC.

In order to rule on the request, the Constitutional Court took into account the following:

A. Under § 1, by which in art. 3, para 2 the words “or registrations” have been added; § 6, by which in art. 20, para 1 the words “by registration or” have been added; § 13, by which a new item 16 has been created in art. 32, para 1; § 23, by which in art. 102, para 1, item 2 are added the words “registration fees”; § 25, by which a new para 6 has been created in art. 105; § 46, by which Article 125a has been created in Section IV; § 48, which created Art. 126a, para 3 and 4, and § 53

The petitioners claim that the law provides for a licensing and registration regime for the creation and distribution of radio and television programs. From this point of view, according to them, the Law on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms contradicts Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as it regulates two different in content and weight legal regimes for the same activity.

CRC believes that the rights of the audience should be equally guaranteed regardless of the transmission environment of the programs. In this sense, it maintains that ,, need to support the request of MPs that if the legislature based on the level of legal protection is sufficient, the licensing regime should be repealed in respect of all and be replaced by registration. "

The opinions of the National Assembly, Council of Ministers, CEM, BMC, excluding the nuances in the interpretation of the disputed texts of the law, can be summarized - differences in the regulation of the activity of operators of terrestrial distribution of programs, on the one hand, and those who distribute programs. , on the other hand, by means other than terrestrial, do exist, but they are conditioned by the fact that the state exercises sovereign rights in the field of limited radio spectrum.

The provision of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution in its first hypothesis states that the law creates and guarantees to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity. This means that the state must build such a system of regulation that guarantees equal legal conditions for all citizens and legal entities in the overall aspect of its content - origin, nature and termination.

In addition, it should be noted that radio and television operators, regardless of the specifics of radio and television activity, which is mainly expressed in information, social, cultural and political functions, also carry out activities with a certain economic focus. The direct investments of the operators in the separate media, the advertising, through which the interests of the producers are represented, the information of any kind directly or indirectly contribute to the circulation of capital. Therefore, the radio and television activity carried out not only by the commercial, but also by the public radio and television operators, regulated by the RTA, must be in compliance with the provisions of the Constitution, referring to the activity of the economic subjects.

The radio frequency spectrum of the country is within strictly defined limits, specified in § 1, item 21 of the transitional and final provisions of the Telecommunications Act (TA). The text is a consequence of an international agreement to which our country is a party.

First of all, it should be borne in mind that the licensing regime is currently mandatory in view of the explicit provision of Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution, according to which the state exercises sovereign rights with respect to radio spectrum. Secondly, the availability of limited radio frequency spectrum requires state intervention in another direction - not to violate international agreements, and to provide candidates for operators for terrestrial radio and television activities with an unoccupied radio frequency resource.

This imposes the conclusion that the licensing regime is a projection of the constitutional obligation of the state to distribute the available frequencies (Decision № 21 of 14.11.96 under Code of Civil Procedure № 19/96, item 5) and of the objective limitation of the frequency resource for terrestrial broadcasting of radio and television programs.

The provisions of § 46, which established Art. 125a et seq.

The registration regime is a step towards deregulation of media activity. Operators wishing to engage in radio and television activities are facilitated by registering on: a procedure that is easier compared to the licensing one; band that is not related to the limited frequency resource; term, as limited frequencies are not used. The scope of the persons to seek, receive and disseminate information is also expanded - Article 41 of the Constitution. Or the regime is in line with the constitutionally enshrined right to free economic initiative.

It is logical to assume in this situation that the existence of objective preconditions for licensing of terrestrial radio and television broadcasting should not result in the introduction of a similar regime for other operators creating programs for distribution through other technical means.

The existence of equal legal conditions for the exercise of economic activity is correlated with the right to freely choose how to exercise the activity - as a terrestrial operator or an operator through registration. The difference in regimes is not a prerequisite for their participation, but a consequence of their choice. However, once made the choice, the operator is subject to differences within the individual mode.

The MPs substantiate their allegation of contradiction with those listed in Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, comparing the different conditions and requirements for carrying out the activity contained in the two regimes.

A brief analysis of the disputed norms is required:

1. Standards relating to the newly introduced registration regime.

The provisions of § 1, by which in art. 3, para 2 the words “or registrations” have been added; § 6, by which in art. 20, para 1 the words “by registration or” have been added; § 13, by which in art. 32, para 1 a new item 16 has been created with content “performs or deletes registrations for carrying out radio and television activity in the cases provided by law”; § 23, with which in art. 102, para 1, item 2 are added the words “ registration fees ” can be thematically united, because all of them concern the newly introduced registration regime for carrying out radio and television activity. It was concluded above that the regime is a step towards deregulation in accordance with the Constitution and that the provisions regulating it do not contradict Article 19 , paragraph 2 .

2. Inequality of operators in terms of deadlines for radio and television activities.

According to § 28, which amended Article 109 of the Act, the term for license of programs distributed through terrestrial means is 15 years, while according to § 46, which created Article 125a, paragraph 7, the distribution of programs through other technical ways is indefinite.

The Constitutional Court held that the difference was objectively determined. The limited radio frequency resource is provided by the state, which exercises its rights under Art. 18, para 3 and 5 of the Constitution. It also determines the term of use. The creation of radio and television programs for distribution by cable, satellite or other technical means is not related to the use of a limited radio frequency resource. The manner of distribution of the created program in the second case is carried out through own or agreed for use foreign telecommunication means. The principle of freedom of contract, which is a consequence of free economic initiative, excludes the right of the state to set the terms of contracts in this area.

Therefore, § 46, which established Article 125a, paragraph 7 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights, is not unconstitutional.

3. Inequality of radio and television operators with regard to the revocation or termination of their telecommunications licenses.

The petitioners claim that , in case of revocation or termination of the license for distribution of a program on other grounds (without seeking grounds), the telecommunications license is revoked or terminated, while in case of deletion of registration in case of systematic violation of the law (Art. 126a, para. 4) the respective telecommunication licenses shall not be revoked ”.

The claim is unfounded. Each terrestrial operator has two individual licenses - for a RTA program and a telecommunications program under the Telecommunications Act. Upon termination or revocation of the program license, it is imperative that the telecommunications license for broadcasting on a certain frequency, in respect of which the state has sovereign rights, be revoked. This is necessary due to the functional dependence of the two types of licenses. As regards the operators registered under the RTA, the radio and television programs created by them are distributed by technical means, other than the terrestrial one, without using a radio frequency resource. Therefore, the law is clear for them - according to the disputed text, only the registration is deleted because there is no mentioned connection between a program and a radio frequency network. Termination will result in a ban on distribution only of the program via its own or another's cable network, satellite or other technical means other than terrestrial.

Therefore, the norm of § 48, which created Article 126a, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the RTA, is not unconstitutional.

4. Inequality of operators in terms of property sanctions.

According to the petitioners, the property sanctions for licensed and registered operators differ in grounds and amount. The former are sanctioned not only for violation of the RTA and for violation of the license - § 48, which created Article 126a, paragraphs 1 and 2, while the latter for violation of the requested program project, program profile or program scheme - § 48, by which Art. 126a, para 3 and 4 of the Law on Public Procurement has been created. In this sense, registered operators are placed at a disadvantage compared to licensed ones.

The Constitutional Court considers that sanctions provided by law may be the subject of a constitutional analysis in view of the provision of Article 5, paragraph 3 of the Constitution. Obviously this is not the case. The legislator has the right to introduce a different regime of administrative sanctions, their type and amount, as he did in the chapter Administrative Penal Provisions of the RTA.

5. Inequality of operators in terms of the scope of the programs.

According to the petitioners, the licensed operators explicitly provide for national, regional and local scope - Article 110, paragraph 1, item 5 of the RTA. In the case of those registered in view of the provision of § 46, by which Art. 125a, para 4 of the Act has been established, no restrictions may be placed related to the scope and distribution of the program.

The Constitutional Court finds that differences exist, but they are not grounds for unconstitutionality. Broadcasters receive a certain resource that the state can provide because it is dependent on the technical limitations of the radio frequency spectrum. As for the distribution of programs through other technical means, there are no practical restrictions. And this is because the law, in line with the requirement of freedom of economic initiative, does not limit the number of satellite transponders, the persons who own cable networks and their construction throughout the country. No framework can be set for possible arrangements between these owners and non-air broadcasters. The created RTA programs can be freely distributed via satellite, cable or other technical means.

In this sense, in § 46, which created Art. 125a, para 4, the expression “ No restrictions related to the scope of distribution of the program may be set during the registration” is not unconstitutional.

6. Inequality of operators in terms of capital requirements.

The petitioners claim that there is an inequality of operators with regard to the requirements for proving the origin of capital. According to them, such exist only for licensed operators. Only for them, as candidate operators, a list of media companies in which they are shareholders or partners is required. According to the petitioners, there is no justification for not applying these requirements to applicants for registration.

The Constitutional Court finds that the complaint is not factually justified. According to Article 111 of the RTA , the applicant must obtain a declaration that the circumstances under Article 108 of the RTA are not present (that no shares, stocks or other rights are held under the antitrust law of the country). They must also submit a declaration under Article 105, paragraph 4 of the law (part of the requirements under this declaration are to prove the ownership of property or capital under Article 6 of the Law on Measures against Money Laundering, as well as under Article 105 , para 6 ZIDZRT the origin of the capital for the last three years). And according to the provision of § 46, which created a new art. 125a ZIDZRT, those wishing to register submit to the CEM the documents under art. 111. In this way, through the referring rule, the regime of both categories of operators is unified with regard to the establishment of the origin of capital.

Therefore, it cannot be argued that the parties are not equal. Paragraph 25, which created a new para 6 in Art. 105 and § 46, which created Art.

7. Unforeseen protection of national security.

The petitioners claim that national security was protected only by the issuance of licenses, which set specific conditions for the content of the programs, which is not a requirement when the registration regime is introduced.

National security is a constitutional value and its protection may be grounds for restriction of fundamental rights under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution in the hypothesis of Article 57, paragraph 3 in compliance with the principle of proportionality of restrictions. There are no norms in the provisions of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities that restrict the right to seek, receive and impart information. As far as things are not put on this plane, in this case there is no constitutional case. Whether there is a threat to national security must be judged in the light of the specific factual situation and the mechanisms for its protection under current legislation.

8. The lack of guarantees for the protection of users of programs - viewers and listeners.

According to the petitioners, the meaning of the definition “scope of the program” in § 46, which created Art. 125a, para 4, is for the regulator to require the program content according to the specifics of the region and the settlement. " In this sense, already licensed program operators with a scope distributed by individual rural cable networks automatically acquire the status of national radio and television programs." Therefore, consumers were not protected as the structured cable market was collapsing.

The claim of the petitioners is a consequence of the misinterpretation of the law. The term "scope of the program" should be understood in a spatial (geographical) rather than substantive (programmatic) sense. The program content is determined by the CEM under the rules of the RTA and it may refuse registration in case of non-compliance of a project, concept, profile or irregularities of the documents under § 46, which created Article 125a, paragraph 4 of the Law on RTA. So regulatory rules exist.

9. Paragraph 53 of the transitional and final provisions of the Act.

In their additional statement, the MPs clarified that their request to declare this provision unconstitutional concerns the possibility for the CEM to issue an official certificate of registration of radio and television operators who hold licenses for radio and television broadcasting within six months. activity by cable or satellite, after presentation of the documents under art. 125a, para 5, without payment of initial registration fee. According to them, the provision contradicts Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution in its part regarding the activity of economic entities.

It was argued above that the difference in the regulation of the two regimes is not unconstitutional. The content of the provision envisages nothing else but the existing licensed operators under the Telecommunications Act, who do not use a radio frequency resource, to be re-registered in accordance with the more liberal requirements of the current regime.

Ultimately, this is a transitional rule that regulates existing legal relations, which must be rearranged in accordance with the requirements of the new legislation, which are not unconstitutional.

B. Under § 13, item 2 in its part, with which in art. 32, para 1 are created items 14 and 15; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37, 38, with which are created respectively Art.   

The petitioners claim that the CEM in its capacity as a non-state body has powers that are followed by the state body CRC.

Indeed, according to the current provision, the CEM is holding a competition for the issuance of a license for radio and television activities through the use of available and / or construction, maintenance and use of new telecommunication networks for terrestrial broadcasting. At the request of an interested person or on its own initiative, it shall hold a competition for issuing a license under the procedure of Art. 116, Art. 116a, Art. 116b, Art. 116c. However, the procedure starts only in the presence of free radio frequency spectrum, a circumstance which is established by CRC. On the other hand, only with a positive decision of the commission, which applies a draft license for telecommunications activity, the tender procedure continues. The foregoing shows that the Commission's decision is an independent legal basis for obtaining a license. Furthermore, the law does not regulate a hypothesis under which a RTA license may be issued if CRC refuses to present evidence of the availability of free radio frequency spectrum or to issue a license for telecommunications activity.

By the way, no matter how the licensing model is determined - unified, bound or unbound, the nature of the CRC functions must be judged by the provisions of the RTA and by the special law regulating its activity - the Telecommunications Act. Thus, Article 27, item 4 of the Telecommunications Act in an imperative mood contains the rule that CRC issues, amends, supplements, suspends, terminates and revokes licenses that use radio frequency spectrum or the positions of the geostationary orbit. In this direction is also art. 62, para 1, item 8 of the Telecommunications Act - when with a decision of CRC the telecommunication license for distribution of the grounds provided in para 1 is terminated, the license under RTA is revoked by CEM only after the entry into force of the decision of the state body.

The conclusion from the interpretation of the law is that the state within the framework of the Constitution has not provided the powers of the CEM provided for in Art. 18, para 3 and 5.

C. Under § 13, by which in art. 32, para. 1 with a set item. 13, 14, 15; § 26, which in art. 106 is created para 3; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37 and 38, which created new Articles 116a, 116b, 116c, 116d; § 42, by which a new para 2 has been created as of Art. § 45, which amended Article 125, paragraph 3. § 44, which created art. 123a.  

The petitioners dispute the constitutionality of the texts of the Law on Public Procurement, which regulate the so-called “tied licensing” of the operators as distributors of RTA programs and of the same persons as telecommunications operators under the Telecommunications Act. According to them, the Constitution was violated because the regulation disadvantaged both sectors (analogue and digital) on the electronic media market and deprived consumers of the opportunity to use digital terrestrial television. Thus, the development of electronic media is blocked.

CRC's opinion is in a similar sense.

The BMC argues that there is a legal incompleteness, which is not a ground for unconstitutionality of the regime.

The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the CEM claim the opposite, that regulations exist, which circumstance was clear from the last wording of Article 27, item 12 of the Telecommunications Act, which regulates part of the powers of the new CRC regulatory body.

Specifically, the objection to the law is that there is no regulation of the digital way of broadcasting programs. The Constitutional Court finds that the absence of regulation in various spheres of economic activity could be connected with an assessment of expediency and hence with a disputed management decision or omission, but not as a ground for contradiction with the Constitution.

From this point of view, the court does not consider it necessary to analyze whether there is a regulation in the LULUCF of the allegations of a more suitable than technical and consumer value digital method of terrestrial distribution, since the allegation of its absence is not unconstitutional.

The norm of art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, last hypothesis states that the law protects the consumer. Its content must be understood in the sense that by law the consumer must be protected through certain standards for the quality of the offered goods and services, to provide protection against risks in their use.

It was claimed that consumers were deprived of the opportunity to use the digital method of broadcasting, which is considered to be preferred in terms of quality, in a terrestrial way.

The Constitutional Court considers that only the availability of a service gives grounds to discuss whether the law provides for protective norms for protection. The fact that the market is incomplete in a certain sphere of economic life is a shortcoming that cannot be associated with violated consumer rights in the present aspect.

Therefore, § 13, by which items 13, 14, 15 are created in Art. 32, cannot be declared unconstitutional; § 26, which in art. 106 is created para 3; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37 and 38, which created new Articles 116a, 116b, 116c, 116d; § 42, by which a new para 2 has been created as of Art. § 45, which amended Article 125, paragraph 3; § 44, which created art. 123a.

What all the texts listed here have in common is that they regulate various aspects of the RTA licensing procedure, according to the petitioners only for the analogue method of broadcasting. It was substantiated above that the lack of legal regulation of a certain economic activity in the given area cannot be a ground for declaring the norms unconstitutional.

D. Paragraph 13, by which a new item 12 has been created in Art. 32, para 1, which contradicts Art. 39, para 1 and Art. 40, para 1 of the Constitution.

According to the MPs, the power granted to the CEM to give mandatory instructions on the implementation of licenses for radio and television activities restricts freedom of speech and editorial independence in violation of Article 39, paragraph 1 and Article 40, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, and the provision of such intervention of the CEM only in respect of the licensed operators violates the principle of equality of economic entities within the meaning of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

CRC claims that the request is justified - opportunities were created for preliminary intervention through mandatory instructions in the "program schemes and the content of the programs, freedom in the selection of employees in the media."

Without giving any reasons, BMC considers that the request in this part is justified.

The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, and the CEM consider that this request is also unfounded. The norm was intended to eliminate an operational omission in the law, as the supervisory body had no way of exercising its powers.

According to the wording of § 13, which created item 12 of Article 32 of the Law on Television and Radio Broadcasting, the CEM may issue mandatory instructions for the implementation of licenses for radio and television activities.

The Constitutional Court held that the powers of the CEM thus formulated did not determine the content and nature of the instructions and did not contain rules by which to restrict freedom of speech and create an opportunity for the exercise of censorship. Thus, in the presence of a general norm, the CEM must comply with the provision of Article 9 of the RTA, proclaiming the free creation of programs and the exclusion of censorship in any form.

As for the possibility provided in § 13, which created item 12 of Article 32 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights, to give instructions, they can refer only to issues that are regulated by law on the implementation of the content of licenses, referred to in Article 110 of the RTA. These include the obligations to comply with Article 6, paragraph 3, Article 7, Article 10 and Article 19, and a schedule for achieving the ratios specified in Article 10, paragraphs 2 and 3. However, the latest listed texts of the RTA do not include interference in the content of the programs, but Article 11 of the RTA in the personnel policy of the operators.

Due to the stated considerations and on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, item 2 the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 50 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to declare the following provisions of the Law on Amendments to the Law on Radio and Television, promulgated, SG No. 96/2001 unconstitutional :

Paragraph 1, by which in Art. 3, para 2 the words “or registrations” have been added; § 6, which amended Art. 20, para 1 in the part regarding the words “through the registration or”; § 13, item 2, by which new items 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 are created in art. 32, para 1; § 23, which in art. 102, para 1, item 2 has been amended and the words “registration fees” have been added; § 25, item 2, by which in art. 105 para 6 has been created; § 26, which in art. 106 is created para 3; § 34, which amended Article 116; § 35, 36, 37, 38, which created respectively 116a, 116b, 116c and 116d; § 42, item 2, by which in art. 121 para 2 has been created; § 44, by which art. 123a was created; § 45, which amended paragraph 3 of Article 125; § 46, which created Article 125a; § 48, by which art. 126a has been created in its part regarding para 3 and 4; and § 53 of the transitional and final provisions.

