Special opinion of Judge Todor Todorov

In Article 106 of the Constitution is governed by one of the powers of the Ministers Council - to " organize the management of state property ." According adopted by court interpretation of the provision separation of powers and independence of the judicial power " exclude the possibility Ministers Council directly or through other     authorities to exercise powers in the management of state property ", conferred on the judicial power . The power in the organization of management is limited solely to the issue of the act (" to be shared and entrusted to the judicial authority for managing specific public property ") by which to empower authority of the judicial power to manage the property . With the issuance of such act constitutionally established function of executive power is exhausted .

I do not share this understanding . It seems to me is , that it starts from the premise of conflict between the interests of the executive and judicial authority and not by constitutional presupposed interaction between the two authorities . Sure is , the wording of Article 106 of the Constitution was adopted on practical considerations , for to be given the opportunity of Ministers Council to be unloaded from the manifold and complex activity in which to express management . This however does not mean , that the organization of management need to be opposed to mere housekeeping . In linguistic terms any management includes and elements of organization . In life two things fundamentally are inextricably linked and there is no rational basis for separating them in the constitutional framework .         

From the view point of the Constitution as any power , so and that a 106 has two sides - right and obligation . The power under Article 106 of the Constitution not be limited to the obligation given property to be submitted to the judicial authorities . In this power is included and the right of executive power in individual cases by appropriate to take direct action by management , as " maintenance " of the building fund . Nothing in the Constitution or in current practice of the Constitutional Court does not give grounds to be challenged this conclusion . What is more important, however , is something else . The organization of the management generally presupposes cooperation between the authorities . The Constitution does not imply and does not regulate the organization of management in terms of conflict .       

