Special opinion of Judge Penka Tomcheva

I do not share the decisive conclusion of the majority and the accompanying motives in the interpretative part under item “A”, which in my opinion are an interpretation of previous interpretative decisions of the Constitutional Court, adapted to the needs of the specific case. The decision lacks an interpretation of the notion of “independent judiciary” regarding the scope of this independence, again referring to other decisions of the Constitutional Court in which this issue is not discussed.

1. The separation of powers under Article 8 of the Constitution should not be understood as an absolute separation of each of the three authorities, the existence of each of them for itself and isolated from the other two. Each of the three authorities acts independently in the respective state area for which it is constitutionally intended, and the three authorities are jointly united by and subordinated to basic principles of the Constitution, the most important of which for specific interpretative issues are: The Republic of Bulgaria is a single state - Article 2, paragraph 1; The Republic of Bulgaria is a state governed by the rule of law - Article 4, and the state is liable for damages caused by illegal acts or actions of its bodies and officials - Article 7 of the Constitution.

As working parts of a whole, the three authorities, through their specific powers and competencies in their fields, mutually exercise the state power and it cannot exist without any of them. In simple terms, the legislature creates the rules, the executive ensures and organizes the application of the rules and the judiciary monitors compliance with the rules and sanctions (not only in the criminal sense) when they are violated. The judiciary cannot perform its functions without the rules created by the legislature and without their manifestation, application in life, incl. by the executive authorities and by all other members of society (citizens, legal entities, business and economic entities, etc.).

2. Having ruled in Art. 117, para 2 of the Constitution that the judiciary is independent, the constitutional legislator has explicitly indicated in what this independence is expressed. The second sentence of the cited constitutional norm states that in the performance of their functions judges, jurors, prosecutors and investigators shall be subject only to the law. These are the parameters of the constitutionally established independence of the judiciary, ie. it is not a question of absolute independence, but of independence within the law. The independence of the judiciary in the face of its bodies, collectively called magistrates, is concentrated within the framework of law enforcement and the administration of justice.

Insofar as, in addition to laws (rules established by the legislature), other conditionally named “instruments” are needed for the implementation of the activity of the judiciary, such as buildings, furniture, technical devices, stationery - in summary, a set of material conditions in the context of the above. above for the separation of powers, I believe that the provision of material conditions is in the prerogatives of the executive branch, it is constitutionally obliged to provide the material conditions necessary for the functioning of the judiciary. Part of them are provided by the independent budget of the judiciary - Article 117, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, and another part, regarding the building stock - by the order of Article 106, by the Council of Ministers.

3. To which body from which authority, resp. to which specific entity the Council of Ministers will provide the management of the designated material base is a matter of operational nature, which is not bound by constitutional requirements. It is enough for the constitutionally obliged Council of Ministers as a supreme body of the executive power to organize the use of state property in such a way - Article 106 of the Constitution that the judiciary can function without problems. Therefore, there is no constitutional obstacle to the management of the state property necessary for the functioning of the judiciary to be provided to both a body of the judiciary and a body of the executive power, resp. of another duly authorized legal entity. There is also no constitutional obligation, arising from Art. 8 and Art. 117, para 2, to manage the management of this property only, exclusively and only to the respective bodies of the judiciary.