JUDGMENT № 12
Sofia, 21 November 2002
constitutional case № 16/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Zhivan Belchev
( Promulgated, SG No. 112 of 29 November 2002)

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev - Rapporteur, Penka Tomcheva

The Constitutional Court was seised with a request of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of 8 decisions of the National Assembly, adopted at the sitting of 14 March 2002 (promulgated, SG No. 30 of 22 March 2002), by which they are dismissed as members of parliamentary committees in the XXXIX National Assembly: from the members of the Committee on Education and Science Elka Panchova Anastasova and Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska; from the composition of the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry Nadka Radeva Pangarova; from the composition of the Commission for Local Self-Government, Regional Policy and Public Works Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov; Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska from the European Integration Commission; from the composition of the Media Commission Elka Panchova Anastasova; from the composition of the Commission for Complaints and Petitions of the Citizens Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova; from the members of the Committee on Culture Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova and from the members of the Committee on Health Nadka Radeva Pangarova.

The applicants maintain that the decisions contradict the provisions of Article 67, paragraphs 1 and 2 and Article 84 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

By a ruling of 12 September 2002 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits and it constituted as interested parties in the case: the National Assembly, Elka Panchova Anastasova, Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska, Nadka Radeva Pangarova, Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov and Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova .

In pursuance of the opportunity provided to them by the Constitutional Court, all interested parties in the case have filed observations on the request.

The National Assembly, through the Committee on Legal Affairs, states that the request of the Members of Parliament is unfounded, as the constitutional regime of the parliamentary committees is regulated in Articles 73, 79, 80 and 83 of the Constitution and no sign of equality between participation can be placed. in the work of the National Assembly in the capacity of Member of Parliament and membership in a parliamentary committee.

The National Assembly elects permanent and temporary committees from among its members, but the decision to elect members of these committees is framed by the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly (PODNS), which is binding on all MPs.

The decisions do not contradict the provisions of Art. 67, para 1 and 2 and Art. 84 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The claim of the petitioners that the decisions releasing the five MPs from membership in the mentioned parliamentary committees violates their “free mandate” (Art. 67, para. 1 of the Constitution) is unfounded, as there is no obligation in the Constitution to The National Assembly shall elect the Member of Parliament as a member of a standing or temporary committee. The provision of Article 67, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is irrelevant to the present dispute.

With regard to the allegation that the procedural decisions violate the provision of Article 84 of the Constitution, the same is untenable. There is no obstacle for the Members of Parliament released from membership in the standing committees to participate both in the work of the National Assembly and in the work of these committees.

MPs Elka Panchova Anastasova, Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska, Nadka Radeva Pangarova, Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov and Stella Dimitrova Angelova-Bankova have submitted written statements requesting that the 8 decisions of the National Assembly, by which they were released as members of the mentioned parliamentary committees, be repealed as unconstitutional.

Their opinions are reduced to stating considerations that the procedural decisions do not comply with the principles of the Constitution and the requirements of Article 20 of the PODNS. They restrict their rights as MPs in the legislative process. The non-admission of MPs to the standing committees due to the fact that they have left the respective parliamentary group has no legal or constitutional grounds and is essentially an act of political repression. The Member of the National Assembly has a free deputy mandate and once he has received the status of a deputy, he enjoys all the opportunities provided by the free mandate. Procedural decisions restrict the rights of independent MPs.

All five MPs agree with the motives and arguments contained in the request.

The Constitutional Court discussed the arguments and opinions of the interested parties set out in the request and, in order to rule, took into account the following:

1. Pursuant to the provision of Article 73 of the Constitution, the organization and activity of the National Assembly shall be carried out on the basis of the Constitution and the PODNS. This text of the Constitution outlines the normative framework in which the National Assembly is constituted and functions.

In carrying out its activities, the National Assembly is assisted by parliamentary committees, which may be permanent or temporary. The commissions have the character of auxiliary bodies of the people's representation - art. 79, para 2 of the Constitution.

The Constitutional Legislator has provided that these commissions are elected by the National Assembly - Article 79, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

The literal interpretation of this constitutional norm shows that the power enshrined in it, as far as the election of standing and temporary committees as auxiliary bodies of the National Assembly is concerned, is imposed solely on the National Assembly. This constitutional power of the National Assembly finds both its logical development and a normative basic one in Chapter Five of the PODNS.

The National Assembly elects the members of the procedural commissions from among its members, ie. the members of these committees are elected by all 240 MPs. Or the National Assembly has the obligation to elect the members of these committees from the entire composition, and not to elect all the MPs as members of these committees.

The election of the members of the standing and temporary committees is carried out by the National Assembly, and the order and conditions of this election are determined by the National Assembly itself through the regulations adopted by it, which has the force of a normative act.

The subject of the request is to establish the unconstitutionality of specific decisions of the National Assembly, and not of norms from the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly.

The claim of the petitioners that the constitutional principle for the so-called "free mandate" of each Member of Parliament, raised in Article 67, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, determines his possibility for mandatory membership in a permanent or temporary commission is constitutionally unfounded.

This is because the participation of an MP in the work of the National Assembly cannot be identified with his participation in a standing or temporary committee. As mentioned above, the procedural commissions are auxiliary bodies of the people's representation. They do not replace the National Assembly, but only support its activities by preparing draft laws, decisions, declarations and addresses.

The constitutional regime of the parliamentary committees is regulated in Articles 79, 80 and 83 of the Constitution. The constitutional texts reach the election of members in the permanent and temporary commissions, as well as with regard to the type, number and composition of these commissions find legal development in the norms of PODNS.

The provision of Article 19, paragraph 1 of the PODNS provides for the quota principle as a basic principle for the constitution of the standing committees.

The claim of the applicants that linking the participation or non-participation in the composition of the parliamentary committees with the participation or non-participation in a parliamentary group is unconstitutional, as the Constitution does not regulate the term “parliamentary group” is untenable. The lack of constitutional regulation of this type of relations does not make them unconstitutional. If there is any relationship between participation or non-participation in a parliamentary group and participation or non-participation in a parliamentary committee, it applies only to the leadership of the parliamentary committee, as leaving or expelling a Member of Parliament leads to his / her mandatory dismissal. standing committee - art. 15, para 4 PODNS.

The members of the standing committees are elected on the proposal of the parliamentary groups or of a Member of Parliament - Article 19, paragraph 3 of the PODNS, but the final decision is taken by the National Assembly. In this case, there is no relationship between participation or non-participation in a parliamentary group and participation or non-participation in a parliamentary committee. However, there is no constitutional norm by virtue of which it should be imposed on the National Assembly to oblige every Member of Parliament to be elected a member of a standing or temporary committee.

2. As to the allegations of the applicants that the procedural decisions of the National Assembly contradict the provisions of Art. 67, para 2 and Art. 84 of the Constitution, the same are insolvent.

According to the provision of Article 67, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the Members of Parliament act on the basis of the Constitution and the laws of the country, as well as in accordance with their conscience and convictions, while the provision of Article 84 of the Constitution refers to the specific competencies of the National Assembly. .

The free mandate of the MPs does not mean an unlimited mandate, because according to the provision of art. 67, para 2 of the Constitution the MPs act on the basis of the Constitution and the laws in the country, ie. their freedom of action is limited within the framework of the Constitution and the laws of the country. In the specific case only the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly adopted by the National Assembly determine the normative conditions and the order under which the Members of Parliament may participate as members of the parliamentary committees.

The arguments put forward in the request that no Member of Parliament, whether party-colored or independent, can and should be deprived, despite his or her will, of participating in the work of parliamentary committees, let alone leaving one or another parliamentary group. find support in the objective content of the norm of art. 67, para 2 of the Constitution. It is unlikely that the dismissal of a Member of Parliament from membership in a parliamentary committee will restrict his freedom of action and put him in a situation where he cannot act in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the country. The allegations set out in this direction are legally and logically unfounded, as there is obviously no connection between these allegations and the provision of Article 67, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The Members of Parliament released from membership in the standing committees shall in no case be deprived of the right and the actual opportunity to exercise their full powers as deputies.

On the one hand, the five Members of Parliament, together with all other Members of Parliament, participate directly in the work of the National Assembly in the exercise of the competences of the National Assembly referred to in Article 84 of the Constitution. On the other hand, although they are exempted from membership in the procedural commissions, they can participate in all their sittings and take direct part in discussing draft laws or other acts of the National Assembly before submitting them for consideration in the National Assembly (Art. 25, para 6 PODNS), even if some of the sessions are closed (art. 25, para 5 PODNS). Indeed, they cannot vote in committee decisions, but they can do so in plenary if they consider that their views have not been adopted by the committee. The dismissal of the five Members of Parliament from membership in the procedural parliamentary committees does not limit their participation in the direct exercise of the competencies of the National Assembly.

It follows from the foregoing that the request is unfounded and should be rejected.

On the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the decisions of the National Assembly adopted at the sitting of 14 March 2002 on the dismissal of the members of the committees: Education and Science of Elka Panchova Anastasova and Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska; on agriculture and forests of Nadka Radeva Pangarova; in local self-government, regional policy and public works of Vladimir Ivanov Dimitrov; on European integration of Siika Nedyalkova Dimovska; in the media of Elka Panchova Anastasova; on the complaints and petitions of the citizens of Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova; in the culture of Stella Dimitrova Angelova - Bankova and in the health care of Nadka Radeva Pangarova. (Promulgated, SG No. 30 of March 22, 2002)

 