Special opinion of Judge Todor Todorov

The request of the Prosecutor General, as admitted by the Constitutional Court, contains two main issues:

- what is the legal nature of the proposals mentioned in Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution, do they constitute an "administrative act in the proper sense";

- whether these proposals are subject to judicial review by the SAC and in cases where the President has issued a decree based on them.

In the answer to the questions thus posed, my understanding differs significantly from that of the court both in the argumentation and in the final conclusions. I must point out, however, that both the court and I are seeking solutions to specific, well-known to the public practical problems. Therefore, in the following pages the theoretical considerations and references are limited to the minimum possible, the regulation is analyzed in a pragmatic context.  , the exhibition has an instrumental character. For people who are not interested in the arguments, but in my position, I answer briefly: the real question is not whether the proposals of the Council of Ministers and the SJC are administrative acts, but whether they are subject to appeal; only the SAC is competent to answer this question; this does not prevent the Constitutional Court from examining the decrees entirely as a court of fact; the incompetence of the body does not always lead to the nullity of the acts issued by it.

To illustrate, I will give a concrete example: If the SJC adopts an illegal decision in violation of the Judiciary Act and proposes to the President on the basis of Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution the dismissal of the Prosecutor General, then in my opinion the Prosecutor General can challenge this proposal before the SAC by the order of art. 5, item 2 of the SAC before the decree of the President; the court has only jurisdiction to assess whether that proposal falls within the scope of the contested acts and to declare it invalid; if a decree has already been issued, it may be challenged before the Constitutional Court, but not by the Prosecutor General, who loses this capacity at the same time as the decree enters into force; the latter circumstance shows why the right of the Prosecutor General to protest the decisions of the SJC before the administrative court is so important, it may be his only defense. Therefore, the opinion that the Constitutional Court may deny the jurisdiction of the SAC (as ruled by the decision) and deprive the Prosecutor General of the right to judicial protection against unlawful dismissal seems to me constitutionally unfounded and life-threatening. The following statement should be read from this angle of view.

І. On the legal nature of the term "proposal" in the Constitution

1. There are various "proposals" in the Constitution

There is no known constitutional definition of the term "proposal". It is obvious that in the Constitution it is used with different meanings. It is absurd to claim that the proposal of one fifth of the MPs to vote no confidence in the Council of Ministers (Art. 89, para. 1) or the proposal to hold debates on a question (Art. 90, para. 2) have the same legal nature, which have the proposal for appointment of a head of diplomatic mission abroad (art. 98, item 6) or the proposal for appointment of a chief prosecutor (art. 129, para 2). It is obvious that these are acts of different legal nature and functions, for which the Constitution uses the same term. The use in the Constitution of the same terms for different acts suggests that it is possible to use different terms for identical in nature acts. Decisive should not be the superficial linguistic analysis (decision or proposal), but the legal nature and functions of the act.    

2. Any "proposal" is a solution

It is a misconception that the decision to make a proposal and the proposal itself are two different acts. Considered as speech acts, all proposals are solutions. On the one hand, they are executives - they contain decisions in favor or against a certain course of action ( decision to propose…); on the other hand, at the same time they are commissions - they oblige their authors to a certain line of conduct (to propose ( ). As Austin (John Longshaw) points out, the connection between the executive and the commission here is as close as between meaning and implication . Speaking in the language of the problem we are interested in here, all the proposals mentioned are solutions. Every proposal implies a solution, the decision implies a proposal. From a logical and therefore from a legal point of view, the proposal cannot be separated from the decision to make it. The two are a single act, regardless of the possible technical, clerical layout in two different documents. By its legal nature, any proposal is a decision.            

3. Not every decision is an act of an administrative body

Every proposal is a decision, but not every decision is an act of an administrative body. From a legal point of view, the above proposals, for example, differ significantly from each other. The constitutional status of their authors is different (not all of them are administrative bodies), the competencies of the latter (not all of them have managerial competencies), the goals and functions of their acts. For example, the subject under Article 89, paragraph 1 of the Constitution (one fifth of the Members of Parliament) is not an administrative body. However, the bodies that issue the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution are administrative bodies.

The mobile and complex subject matter of political (governing or parliamentary) acts, as well as the understanding of the immunity from judicial review available to them, can be discussed separately . In my opinion, this is not required by the subject matter of the case.    

4. The procedural proposals differ from each other

However, it is inevitable to find a significant difference from a constitutional point of view between the proposals included in the subject matter of the case - under Article 98, item 6 and Article 100, paragraph 2, on the one hand, and the proposal under Article 129, paragraph 2. , on the other hand. This difference is formally and legally expressed in the binding force of the proposal for the President and is practically important for the assessment of the legal interest in his independent appeal, regardless of the President's decree. A brief comparative analysis of the system confirms this.    

5. The proposals under art. 98, item 6 and art. 100, para 2

The first two proposals were addressed to the President in his capacity as the bearer of key constitutional functions in the field of international relations and in the field of defense and the armed forces. In both cases, there is no doubt that the body making the proposals (the Council of Ministers) is a supreme administrative body; that he has constitutionally established managerial competencies in the above two areas (Article 105, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution); that the purpose and functions of the proposals made are the exercise of its sovereign powers in the field of international relations and defense. Therefore, there is no doubt that these proposals are acts of administration , regardless of whether and to what extent they are administrative acts according to the legal definition of Article 2 of the Administrative Procedure Act. With regard to their legal force for the President, the following should be briefly noted:  

5.1. The president may refuse to issue a decree. Constitutional powers, as well as the status of the head of state established in international law, derive from state sovereignty and reveal the special place of the president in the implementation of international relations and defense. In this context, the powers of the President under Article 98, item 6 and Article 100, paragraph 2 of the Constitution should also be considered. He may refuse to comply with the proposal of the Council of Ministers and this refusal does not constitute a violation of the Constitution.   

5.2. The Council of Ministers and the President have joint competence. Therefore, in both cases, the proposals of the Council of Ministers are made conditional on a presidential decree; the latter also has significant competences in the relevant field. The constitutional framework binds the competencies of the two bodies, the so-called joint competence (thus explicitly also Decision № 13 of 30 September 1999 under Code of Civil Procedure № 9/99, SG No. 88/1999). An expression of this joint competence is the requirement for countersignature by the Prime Minister or the respective Minister as a constitutive element for the validity of the decree - Article 102, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.   

Conflicts may arise between the two bodies in the exercise of their joint competence, but no legal mechanisms are provided for their possible resolution. Only the way to be resolved by political means within the framework of the general constitutional obligation for interaction between the authorities remains open.

6. The proposal under art. 129, para 2

The regulation of the proposal under Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is significantly different. From the point of view of the body that does it, it is an act of a "supreme administrative body that carries out the management of the structures of the judiciary" - Decision № 8 of 15 September 1994 under c.d. № 9/94 (SG, issue 78 of 1994). From the point of view of its legal force, however, it differs significantly. The power of the president to appoint and dismiss the presidents of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme Administrative Court and the Prosecutor General on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council is isolated. This power is not tied to any participation of the President in the organization and functioning of the judiciary. While the president's involvement in the appointment and dismissal of ambassadors and generals is justified by his responsible functions in the field of international relations and defense, his power in the judiciary is largely symbolic.  

6.1. The president cannot refuse to issue a decree. For this reason, the repeated proposal under Art. 129, para 2, assoc. the last of the Constitution has a definitive, final character. It is absurd to claim that it is only of a preparatory nature and does not give rise to legal consequences. The President cannot refuse appointment or dismissal on a repeated proposal - the Constitution deprives him of any discretion in this case. The "can't refuse" formula is just a softer version of an explicit constitutional obligation . Failure to fulfill this obligation is a violation of the Constitution and is sanctioned with constitutional liability - Article 103, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.         

6.2. The president is constitutionally obliged. The Constitutional Court had the opportunity obiter dictum to establish the existence of such an obligation and the symbolic, prestigious nature of the presidential decree under Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. In Decision № 13 of 25 July 1996 under c.d. № 11/96 (SG, issue 66 of 1996) the court, considering the adoption of Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution in the Grand National Assembly, explicitly notes: “The idea of ​​appointing the chairmen of the SCC and SAC, as well as the Prosecutor General to be carried out by the President on the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council, and to give the Presidential Decree above all a prestigious character - therefore, if the first time the President refuses for reasons of expediency, ie considered inappropriate the proposed candidacies, in case of a repeated proposal by the Supreme Judicial Council that he is obliged to issue a decree for appointment "(italics mine - T.T.).       

The president is therefore obliged to comply with the decision of the Supreme Judicial Council. In case of a second proposal, the signing of the decree is not a constitutional right, but a constitutional obligation of the president. Of course, this obligation cannot be guaranteed man u militari , but the lack of enforceability of the decision does not change its essence.    

7. There is no administrative act "in its own sense"

What has been said so far reveals the essence of the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution as acts of administration, issued within the constitutionally established competence of the respective bodies. Of course, this does not answer the question of whether these acts are administrative acts "in the proper sense". This type of qualification is a doctrinal abstraction, with no practical significance. The country's constitution and laws do not contain a general definition of the term "administrative act".

Indeed, Article 2 of the Administrative Procedure Act contains a definition, but as stated there, only for " individual administrative act" and only " within the meaning of this law ". This definition does not take precedence over the more general, generalizing language of the Constitution and does not exclude the constitutional admissibility of other administrative acts with other characteristics and under other laws.    

ІІ. Are the proposals subject to judicial review by the SAC even in cases where the President has issued a decree based on them?

8. The principle of art. 120, para 1

8.1. Not only administrative acts are subject to judicial review . The Constitution explicitly states that "Courts exercise control over the legality of acts and actions of administrative bodies" - Article 120, paragraph 1. This means that all acts are covered , regardless of their type and theoretical qualification - Ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus . With the development of the rule of law, the principle of judicial control over the administration is being applied more and more widely. Exceptions to this principle must therefore be interpreted and applied restrictively.     

8.2. The Constitution distinguishes between "acts of the administration" and "administrative acts" . An argument for this is the next paragraph of Article 120, according to which citizens and legal entities may appeal all administrative acts that affect them, except those explicitly specified in the law. Under Article 120 have used two different concepts - " acts of administrative bodies ... " (here may be covered solutions from different nature and contracts concluded by the administration) and " administrative acts " (as authoritative statements), apparently with different content. Therefore, the judicial control under Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is in principle admissible for all acts of the administration, including proposals, regardless of whether the latter can be defined as "administrative acts".             

By the way, in modern European law it is indisputable that the acts of the administration are not all and necessarily administrative acts ( Chapus, R., Droit administratif general, tome 1, 11e edition, Montchrestien, Paris, 1997, p.479 ).  

9. The Constitution allows exceptions

Undoubtedly, the specifics of the managerial activity, as well as the activity of other bodies of state power require in some cases the exclusion of certain categories of acts from judicial control. In Bulgarian administrative law, this possibility derives from the very wording of Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The non-articulated form of "acts" has been used, which makes it possible to exclude some of them by law . In this sense are the provisions of art. 34 ZAP and art. 7 ZVAS.  

10. The SAC is competent to interpret and apply the law

10.1. The legislator determines the scope of the appealed acts . In this sense, Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution should also be interpreted. According to him, "the Supreme Administrative Court rules on disputes over the legality of acts of the Council of Ministers and ministers, as well as other acts specified in the law." Let me remind you, as is evident from Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, not all acts of the Council of Ministers are subject to judicial review. The Constitution explicitly delegates the legislator to determine which acts of the Council of Ministers and which "other acts" are within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Administrative Court. Insofar as the competence is given to the latter, only he can determine whether and when the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution are subject to judicial control. Within the framework of the current legislation (Art. 5, items 1 and 2 of the SAA: "The Supreme Administrative Court hears appeals and protests against acts of the Council of Ministers", respectively "appeals and protests against decisions of the Supreme Judicial Council", see also Art. 34, para 1 and art. 92, para 2 JSA) only the administrative court can assess the scope of the legal norms. 

10.2. The scope of the exceptions is interpretable. This approach is determined by the variety and specificity of the issued acts and presupposes the granting of wider discretion to the law enforcement bodies in the concretization of the norms. For example, the language of Art. 7, item 2 of the Supreme Administrative Court, according to which "acts by which the foreign policy, defense and security of the country are implemented are not subject to consideration by the Supreme Administrative Court" (compare with Art. - "acts directly related to the defense and security of the country"), provides a fairly wide range of discretion of the court. Only he is competent to decide which acts should be excluded from judicial appeal, as this also applies to the proposals under Article 98, item 6 and Article 100, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. 

10.3. The existence of a legal interest is decided by the court. Only the SAC is competent to assess whether and when there is a legal interest in appealing the act. To what extent the practice adopted by him (see, for example, ref. 1552-1999-SAC, 5-member panel, Administrative Justice, 1999, № 2, p. 103) can be referred to the proposal under Article 129, paragraph 2 of The constitution or change is entirely his question, which he decides independently.   

11. On the constitutional distribution of competencies

11.1. The competence of the SAC is constitutionally established. It should be borne in mind that the competence of the SAC to rule on the legality of the acts of the Council of Ministers and other acts specified in the law is constitutionally established - Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The addressee of the norm is the Supreme Administrative Court, and the reference to "acts specified in the law" shows that the extension or narrowing of the scope of its competence is left to the legislator. 

11.2. The Constitutional Court should limit itself in the interpretation of Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It is inadmissible for him to limit the constitutionally established competence of the SAC by excluding by interpretation some or other acts of judicial control. This right is not given to him by the Constitution. In my opinion, from a substantive point of view, the Constitutional Court is the guardian of the principle of comprehensive judicial control against unjustified activity of the legislator - creator of exceptions. The spirit of constitutional justice must be geared to an ever-widening scope of judicial review of administrative acts in accordance with the rule of law.   

11.3. The competence of the Constitutional Court is only for constitutionality . From a procedural point of view, the Constitutional Court has its relatively clearly defined competence under Article 149 of the Constitution. This competence in relation to different categories of acts is, in principle, limited only to the examination of their constitutionality , but not to their legality. This is evident from the categorical provision of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution: the Constitutional Court rules on "a request to establish the unconstitutionality of laws and other acts of the National Assembly, as well as acts of the President".     

11.4. The Constitutional Court does not, in principle, control the legality of acts. Therefore, the Constitution clearly distinguishes the competence of the two bodies (Constitutional Court and SAC) in two directions: by means of controlled acts ( ratione materiae ); in line with the alleged vices. The Constitutional Court controls only acts of parliament and the president. He does not control acts of the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Judicial Council. The latter are within the competence only (Art. 92, para 2 JSA) of the Supreme Administrative Court. The Constitutional Court controls the constitutionality of acts of parliament and the president, but does not control their legality.     

12. On the conflict of competences

12.1. The constitutional framework is a source of conflict. The regulation, including in this case, shows that a conflict between the competences of the Constitutional Court and the SAC is possible. Such a conflict may arise initially as a conflict of interpretations (eg different interpretation of Article 125, paragraph 2 and / or Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution), manifest itself in a conflict of competences and end in a conflict of decisions. . 

12.2. In some cases, the Constitutional Court also checks the legality. In my opinion, when illegal proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution end with a decree of the President, the Constitutional Court shall rule on these decrees as a court on the facts. (if duly seised under Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution). Its competence also includes checking the legality of the proposals. The contradiction that exists between the understanding maintained here and the provision of Article 92, paragraph 2 of the JSA, according to which the SAC is the " only instance " competent to rule on the legality of acts of the Council of Ministers and the SJC, is only apparent. The legal norm cannot be opposed to the constitutional power to verify the constitutionality of the decree, and the latter necessarily includes a verification of the legality. A reverse understanding would narrow the control over constitutionality only until the signature of the president is checked, which is especially meaningless in the case of the repeated proposal of the SJC under Article 129, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.         

The question of the legality of the proposals is preliminary to the decree issued. The relations between the bodies of the executive and the judiciary, on the one hand, and the President, on the other hand, are constitutional in nature and their lawful implementation is a condition for their constitutionality . Therefore, in cases where the proposals are followed by a presidential decree and this decree is challenged before the Constitutional Court, the latter also rules on the legality of the proposals.    

13. On the applicable law

In its assessment of the constitutionality of the decrees, the Constitutional Court will be guided by the Constitution. It is not superfluous to add, however, that in assessing the legality of the proposals , respectively their validity, the court should be guided both by the laws in force in the country and by general and well-established principles of European constitutional and administrative law and justice. Their application (the principle of legality and presumption of validity of the act, the requirement for legal stability and the justified expectations of legal entities, the theory of the actual functionary and the external visibility of the act) eliminates the nullity of acts issued by an incompetent authority and ensures the smooth functioning of government. . The reasonable and state application of these principles is a mandatory element of both constitutional and administrative justice. Therefore, the incompetence of the incorrectly constituted SJC, for example, does not always mean that the acts issued by it are null and void. The Court has considerable discretion to apply those principles and to reject an application for annulment. The Constitutional Court also has such an opportunity in assessing the constitutionality of the issued decrees.      

14. Conclusion

For the reasons set out above, I consider that the operative part of the judgment in this case should read as follows:

“The proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution are acts of administrative bodies within the meaning of Art. 120, para 1 and Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution.

According to Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the range of acts subordinated to judicial control of the Council of Ministers and of the Supreme Judicial Council is determined by law. By virtue of Article 125, paragraph 1, the interpretation and application of the law is a constitutionally established competence of the SAC, which includes the assessment of legal interest in appealing an act followed by a presidential decree.

The decrees issued on the basis of the proposals under Art. 98, item 6, Art. 100, para 2 and Art. 129, para 2 of the Constitution shall be subject to review for constitutionality before the Constitutional Court by the order of Art. 149, para .1, item 2 of the Constitution. When examining the constitutionality of decrees, the Constitutional Court is competent to also verify the legality of previous proposals, regardless of whether such verification has been made by another body before. "

