Special opinion of Judge Lyudmil Neykov

With this particular opinion to express its reservations concerning the admissibility of the requested interpretation of the provisions of Article 98, item 6, Article 100, paragraph 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution , through which can be given by the Constitutional Court reply of the question , whether subject to judicial control by the hand of the Supreme administrative Court referred in the texts “ suggestions ”, incl . and in cases , when the president of the republic has issued no decree on the basis of them .

I believe , that the answer to this question is not can not be given by the Constitutional Court in terms of mandatory interpretation of the provisions of Article 98, item 6, Article 100, paragraph 2 and Article 129, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution .

The request by way of mandatory interpretation to be given an answer to the question , as there is the exercise of judicial control over those acts is based on the absence of explicit legislation on this issue in the constitutional provision , whose interpretation is requested . I want to emphasize , that principle is opposed to such an interpretation of the Constitutional Court , which replaces the missing constitutional or legislative framework . This would mean the creation of a new constitutional framework , equivalent to supplementing the Constitution , which the Constitutional Court does not have the power to do .

In this case , however, will and lack of constitutional provisions . Constitutional legislator explicitly has regulated the possibility of judicial control of the acts of the Ministers Council and of ministers , as and of other acts , set out in law . This was done with the provision of Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution . Designated is competent for this authority in the face of the Supreme Administrative Court , which carried out the supreme supervision for precise and equal application of the laws in administrative justice and to rule on disputes about the legality of acts of the Ministers Council and of ministers , as and of other acts .

Exercise by the competent court in regulated by the Constitution judicial control in the referral him with relevant complaint presupposes before all assessment of the eligibility of the submitted complaint . In this judgment the court checked and if the complaint is directed against an administrative act . That is why if the subject of the appeal acts of the Ministers Council and of ministers , as well and other acts , referred to in the law is the question , on which the Constitution is determined the Supreme Administrative Court for the competent authority to give a response . Unacceptable is in the path of the requested interpretation of those texts of the Constitution to be given an answer to a question , which is constitutionally settled , although in another text of the Constitution , and even less in this way the Constitutional Court to seize of the Supreme Administrative Court powers , provided to him by the constitutional legislator .