JUDGMENT № 3
Sofia, 25 September 2002 constitutional cases № 11/2002 Judge-Rapporteur Vasil Gotsev (Promulgated, SG No. 94 of 4 October 2002) 



Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev - Rapporteur, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted at the request of 57 MPs from the XXXIX National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5; Article 43, paragraph 5; Article 57, paragraph 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; 88, para 2 and art. 109 of the Law for protection of the classified information (CIPA), promulgated, SG, issue 45 / 30.04.2002, as well as of § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the same law .

And

1. At the beginning of the request, considerations are set out against § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the Classified Information Act (CLRAIP), which is alleged to be contrary to the provisions of Article 41 and Article 57, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. With the repeal of the Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (SDBDSBRUGST) (promulgated, SG, issue 63/97, amended and supplemented, issue 89/97, No. 69/99, No. 24/2001, No. 52/2001), which enacts § 37 of the PHCIP, violates the fundamental right of citizens guaranteed by the Constitution (Art. 41) to seek and receive information, approved by a number of international acts to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party.

2. It is alleged that as it is not indicated in Art. 35, para 1 and 5 of the CIPA that the register to be kept by the State Commission on Information Security (SCIS) for the materials and documents containing classified information, representing state or official secret, and with art. 35, para 5 of CIPA it is provided to the regulations to settle the conditions and the order for inquiries from the register, the right of the citizens to be informed is also violated. The lack of information did not give them the opportunity to exercise their right under Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution to appeal against the administrative acts that affect them.

3. It is maintained that Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA contradicts Article 48 of the Constitution, as it restricts the right to work. The text was also inconsistent with Convention No. 111 of 1958 on Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation, to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party (ratified by Decree № 205/60 of the Presidium of the National Assembly, promulgated, Izvestia). No. 46/60) and with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (promulgated, SG No. 80/92 , amended, SG No. 137/98). The unforeseen procedure for judicial protection also violated Article 56 of the Constitution.

4. In contradiction with art. 120, para 2 of the Constitution it is indicated that the provisions of art. 57, para 5 are also; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; 88, para 2 and art. 109 CIPA, which exclude the right to appeal against the administrative acts, related to access, termination and refusal of access to classified information. This also infringes the right to protection of the persons to whom the relevant acts relate.

The statement of the applicants also contains arguments for contradiction of the cited provisions with the indicated international acts and conventions to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party. However, the request is based only on Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution and the Constitutional Court is not required to rule on the basis of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 4 of the Constitution on the conformity of the attacked texts of the CIPA. with some of the norms of international law or with international treaties to which Bulgaria is a party. According to Article 22, paragraph 1 of the Constitutional Court Act, the court is not limited by the stated ground for non-compliance with the Constitution. However, he may rule only on the requests, specifically indicated in some of the points of art. 149, para 1. This is what motivates the ruling of the Constitutional Court to allow for consideration only the requests that are based on contradictions with the Constitution.

ІІ

By its ruling of 25 June 2002, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution. The following parties have been constituted as interested parties in the case: the National Assembly, the President of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Prosecutor General, the National Intelligence Service, the State Security Service, the State Security Service. archive, the Human Rights Committee, the Union of the Repressed in Bulgaria after September 9, 1944, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Truth Union, the Access to Information Program Foundation and the Bulgarian League for Human Rights.

Pursuant to the opportunity provided by the Constitutional Court, only the National Assembly gave opinions on the request, stating that the opinion had been adopted by the Committee on Internal Security and Public Order, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Defense, the National Intelligence Service. , National Security Service, General Directorate of Archives at the Council of Ministers, Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, Access to Information Program, Bulgarian League for Human Rights, Supreme Administrative Court and the Human Rights Committee.

An additional statement in support of the request was received by the representative of the group of MPs who referred to the Constitutional Court.

The National Assembly has indicated that the Committee on Internal Security and Public Order at the second vote of the CIPA thoroughly discussed the texts subject to the request to the Constitutional Court and considered them to be in compliance with the Constitution. She discussed the arguments in the request of the group of MPs and stated that she retained her opinion under Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5; Article 43, paragraph 5; Article 57, paragraph 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; 88, para 2 and art. 109 CIPA and provides the Constitutional Court to rule on the dispute. The opinion does not say anything about § 37 of the CRPD.

The Council of Ministers maintains that the request of the group of MPs is unfounded and should be rejected. The detailed argumentation maintains that Article 41 of the Constitution is irrelevant to § 37 of the CIPA and does not infringe the constitutional right to information. This is according to the Council of Ministers, because there is no constitutional provision requiring the explicit adoption of a law on the conditions for the order and access to the documents of the former State Security and the former RFBH. The access to information regarding these documents will be carried out according to the order and under the conditions of other current laws - the Law for access to public information (APIA), promulgated, SG, issue 55/2000, amended, issue 1/2002 and the Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA), promulgated, SG, issue 1/2002. If some of them contain unconstitutional restrictions on the right to seek and receive the relevant information, they are what should be to challenge.

Regarding Art. 35, para 1 and 5 of the CIPA, the Council of Ministers considers that the non-indication in the text that the register is public does not mean that the citizens do not have access to it. The terms and conditions for this would be regulated in the envisaged regulations, which should be in compliance with the CIPA, the APIA, the LPPD.

Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA did not restrict the right to work. According to the opinion, the constitutional right to work is not the right to hold any position.

Regarding the revoked right to judicial appeal of acts for refusal, termination and revocation of access to documents and materials classified as state and official secret in art. 57, para 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; Article 88, paragraph 2 and Article 109 of the CIPA states that such a restriction is provided for in Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It is designed to guarantee and comply with the public interest in the protection of classified information.

The Minister of the Interior also finds the request to the Constitutional Court unfounded. According to him, in the register under Art.

35, para 1 of CIPA will not contain information included in the list of categories of information, representing classified information. He believes that the publicity of the register is legally guaranteed by the provided procedure for access to the register.

According to him, Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA does not contradict the guaranteed constitutional right to work, which is not absolute.

In connection with the alleged violation by the applicants of Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution with the texts of the CIPA, which exclude judicial appeal of acts of refusal, termination and deprivation of access to classified information, the opinion states that the restriction is in accordance with art. 120, para 2 of the Constitution, because it is dictated by interests of the national security.

The opinion does not contain any considerations in relation to § 37 of the PHCIP. The text is mentioned only in the series of articles related to the revocation of the right to appeal, although it does not mention this.

According to the Minister of Defense, the register under Article 35 of the CIPA should not be public, because the data it contains (listed in Article 35, paragraph 2 of the CIPA) are directly related to national security.

The opinion states that this case does not concern the restriction of the right to work, and that it is not absolute.

In accordance with Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, according to the same are the restrictions in connection with the right to judicial appeal in the texts of CIPA, which are attacked before the Constitutional Court.

The Minister of Defense does not take a stand on the occasion of the repeal of the Law on Defense of the Republic of Bulgaria with § 37 of the CIPA.

The opinion of the National Intelligence Service maintains that § 37 of the Law on Intelligence does not violate the Constitution, but repeals only “one law, the public need of which has disappeared”.

It was correct for Article 35, paragraph 5 of the CIPA to refer to regulations, because it contains "a number of data on which foreign special services could perform analyzes and acquire intelligence information." This would threaten national security. For the remaining texts of the CIPA, which are attacked by the petitioners, the opinion leaves it to the Constitutional Court to assess.

The National Security Service believes that the disputed provisions of the CIPA do not contradict the Constitution.

The fact that Article 35, paragraph 1 of the CIPA does not state that the register is public does not mean that this is not the case. According to the opinion, the data in it do not correspond to the classified information determined by the CIPA. Therefore, although not explicitly stated, the register is public.

Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA did not violate the right to work, as the citizen himself, who requested to be examined for access to classified information in connection with a certain job, withdrew his request. The stated one-year ban on re-applying is to prevent possible abuses of rights.

Regarding the limited right to judicial appeal in the attacked articles of the CIPA, the opinion maintains that Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution gives the right to do so, as they were made in the interest of national security. An administrative appeal to the SCIS was also envisaged.

No arguments have been made in support of § 37 of the CRPD.

The opinion of the General Directorate of Archives at the Council of Ministers states that the CIPA was not agreed with him. The activity of the department is described, indicating that the documents in the Central Military Archive are used with the consent of the Minister of Defense. The use of confidential documents from the State Archive Fund is carried out in compliance with the requirements of the Ordinance on the activities of the National Security Service to ensure the protection of strategic sites and activities and protection of state secrets in the Republic of Bulgaria, and a list of facts, information and objects. which constitute a state secret of the Republic of Bulgaria.

It is pointed out that the establishment of the unconstitutionality of Articles 35, para. 1 and 5; 43, para 5; 57, para 5; 59, para 5; 60, para 5; 68, 69, 88, para 2 and 109 of the CIPA are not within the competence of the department. There is no opinion under § 37 PZRZZKI.

The Bulgarian Helsinki Committee rules only on the texts of the CIPA, which are related to the exclusion of the right to appeal. According to him, they are unconstitutional because they contradict Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution.

The opinion of the Access to Information Program takes into account only § 37 of the PHCIP and Article 35 of the same law.

In connection with § 37 of the PCPCPC, the possibility is considered for the Constitutional Court to rule on the unconstitutionality of repealing norms in law. It is assumed that this is possible, as it is necessary to examine the repealed norm. According to the Access to Information Program, § 37 of the PHCIPC contradicts Article 41, paragraph 1 and Article 32, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It blocked the way to obtain information that the APIA cannot provide. There was no other law by which it could be obtained. The opportunity of the citizens to check who violated their rights under Article 32, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, which also referred to the time before its adoption, was also taken away.

The opinion maintains that it contradicts the Constitution and Article 35 of the CIPA regarding the register. Accordingly, the fact that it is not expressly stated that it is not public does not guarantee that access to the information it contains will not be restricted.

The Supreme Administrative Court shall dwell only on the provisions of Article 57, paragraph 5; Article 59, paragraph 5; Article 60, paragraph 5; Article 68; Article 69; Article 88, paragraph 2 and Article 109 of the CIPA. According to him, they affect the basic constitutional rights of citizens and contradict the Constitution.

The Human Rights Committee shall consider only Article 57, paragraph 5; 59, para 5; 60, para 5; 68; 69; 88, para 2 and 109 of CIPA and under § 37 of the TFP of the same law.

It is maintained that the repeal of the SDBSA is not unconstitutional, as the Constitution does not provide for a law to repeal it. At the same time, this law affected "foreign rights".

The opinion of the Committee regarding the above-mentioned provisions of the CIPA, which it commented on, is that they have “perversely” exercised the right of the legislator to limit the possibility for judicial appeal of certain administrative acts, which violates Article 120 of the Constitution. .

The Bulgarian League for Human Rights accepts that the request to declare the provisions of the Act mentioned in it unconstitutional is fully justified. According to her, it also contained allegations of contradiction with international treaties to which Bulgaria was a party, which should have been taken into account by the Constitutional Court, although there was no explicit reference to Article 149, paragraph 1, item 4 of the Constitution.

The additional opinion of the applicants maintains again that the disputed provisions of the CIPA contradict the respective texts of the Constitution.

III

Having considered the arguments and considerations of the petitioners and the opinions of the constituted as interested parties, the Constitutional Court accepted the following:

1. On the request for establishing unconstitutionality of art. 35, para 1 and 5 of CIPA

The request is unfounded. Insofar as there is no constitutionally protected right of citizens and legal entities to access classified information, there is no right of access to the register in which the materials and documents containing classified information are described. The register under Art. 35, para 1 of CIPA shall be established in order to serve the activity of the persons under Art. 3, para 2 of CIPA, whose "official duties or specifically assigned task" require access to classified information and who have received permission for such access and in particular to the persons under art. 31, para 1 of CIPA. In this sense, the register has an official character. It is not intended to inform citizens, for example, about the creation of a document containing classified information - Article 35, paragraph 2, item 1 of the CIPA. The main purpose of the register is to systematize the archival units and to allow the ex officio persons, as well as those with authorized access under the conditions of a huge information array to fulfill their obligations under the law. The analysis of Article 41 of the Constitution shows that only the legislator is competent to assess whether the information entered in the register is of public importance, respectively whether to provide access to it by law. This applies to any information, and even more so to information that relates to national security. There is no constitutional obligation for the legislator to provide public access to the register, therefore the request should be rejected.

For the same reasons, in view of the regulated matter, there are no constitutional obstacles that exclude the right of the legislator to delegate the specific regulation for work with the register of the regulations for application of the law.

2. On the request for establishing unconstitutionality of art. 43, para 5

The provision does not contradict the Constitution. According to Article 43, paragraph 2 of the CIPA, the reliability investigation procedure for issuing a decision for access to classified information shall be carried out after the written consent of the person to be examined. This consent may be withdrawn at any time during the investigation procedure (Article 43, paragraph 4 of the CIPA). The attacked before the Constitutional Court para 5 of art. 43 CIPA establishes that the person who withdrew his written consent for investigation has no right for a period of one year to re-apply for a position or to perform a specific task related to work with classified information.

According to the applicants, this violated Article 48 and Article 56 of the Constitution. On the one hand, it constituted a violation of the right to work (Article 48 K), and on the other hand, it also violated the right to protection (Article 56 K). It was also contrary to Convention № 111 on Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation of 4 June 1958. Decision № 2/99 on c.d. № 33/98 (promulgated, SG No. 8/99), to which the Constitutional Court has declared unconstitutional and inconsistent with international treaties to which Bulgaria is a party, § 1 of the transitional and final provisions of the Act for the administration (PZRZA) (promulgated, SG, issue 130/98).

There is a fundamental difference between the text of § 1 of the TFPA and Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA. Therefore, the judgments of the Constitutional Court in the decision, to which the applicants refer, are irrelevant to it. The norm of § 1 PZRZA is lustration. It restricts the right of certain categories of persons to hold senior positions in the administration because they have held senior positions or equated to them in the political and administrative apparatus of the Bulgarian Communist Party or have been collaborators of the former State Security in any category specified in ZDDBDS (before the amendment of the law from 2001). The Constitutional Court has ruled that this restriction is unconstitutional and inconsistent with international treaties to which Bulgaria is a party.

However, Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA refers to something else. It does not terminate employment relationships based on political criteria, as the Constitutional Court had in mind in the cited decision, but addresses the issue of applying for a person to hold a certain position or perform a certain activity, which he himself has given up. The withdrawal of written consent to conduct a reliability study in relation to the handling of classified information may be for various reasons. They can move within the reluctance of the person to be assigned to him and to perform certain work, to the reluctance of the inspection to reveal circumstances and facts about his personality. In both cases, however, it was not the rule of law that limited his right to work, but his own decision. However, the dignity and good name of the withdrawer are not impaired, since he himself has determined that the work with classified information is not suitable for him. Of course, this does not prevent any other job from working according to their qualifications. The restriction is for a period of one year. The envisaged one-year period during which the person cannot repeat his / her request for an access survey is also a barrier to abuse of rights. The right to work under Article 48 of the Constitution does not mean that everyone can work any job, regardless of their qualifications. According to Decision № 18/97 of the Constitutional Court (promulgated, SG No. 110/97), it is not absolute and “subject to various restrictions of an objective and subjective nature”. Reliability for access to classified information is also a type of specific qualification that is related to the national interests of the country. Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA does not concern an initial restriction on employment, as referred to in Convention № 111/1958, but an arbitrary withdrawal of a request for research necessary for work with classified information. . The provision was created for national security reasons. In support of Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA, an argument can be drawn from Article 4 of the cited Convention. According to him, "measures that affect a person who is subject to a legitimate suspicion that he is engaged in activities that harm the security of the state are not considered discriminatory." It is characteristic that we are talking not only about established facts, which is further stated in Article 14 of the Convention, but even only about "suspicion".

In Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA there is also no room for interference with the constitutional right to protection (Article 56 K), as here the will to withdraw the given consent for investigation belongs to the one who initially gave it. He has nothing to defend himself against.

In view of the above, the request to establish that Article 43, paragraph 5 of the CIPA contradicts Article 48 and Article 56 of the Constitution is unfounded.

3. On the request for establishing the unconstitutionality of art. 57, para 5, art. 59, para 5, art. 60, para 5, art. 68, art. 69, art. 88, para 2 and art. .109 of the CIPA

All these provisions concern the exclusion of the right to appeal against the refusal to grant permission for access to classified information, its termination or revocation by the relevant authorities. The claim of the applicants is that they contradict Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. There is also a Decision по 8/99 on c.d. № 4/99 of the Constitutional Court (promulgated, SG, issue 47/99).

According to Article 57, paragraph 1 of the CIPA, the issuance of permission for access to classified information of the respective level is refused when in the course of the investigation it is established that the researched does not meet some of the requirements under Article 40, paragraph 1 of the CIPA or knowingly has submitted incorrect or incomplete data. The text exhaustively lists the conditions for issuing a permit. Article 41 and Article 42 of the CIPA clarify the concept of “reliability” of surveys, which is one of the conditions specified in Article 40, paragraph 1.

Article 58 of the CIPA states what the permit and the possible refusal must contain. Item 6 of the same article states that the legal basis for the issuance or refusal to grant permission must also be mentioned. Article 60, paragraph 1 of the CIPA lists the cases in which the body that issued the permit may terminate it. Upon termination, Article 58 of the CIPA shall apply.

When issuing, terminating and revoking a permit for access to classified information regarding cryptographic security, Article 88, paragraph 2 of the CIPA refers to the conditions of Chapter Five of the Law, which contains all the above rules.

For the protection of industrial security, Art. 96 and Art. 97 of the CIPA provide for specific but listed rules for issuing and refusing a permit. According to Article 103, paragraph 3 of the CIPA, the refusal is not motivated. According to Article 104, paragraph 1, item 3, the legal basis shall be indicated in the permit and the refusal.

The Articles 57, para 5, 59, para 5, 60, para 5, 88, para 2 and 109 of the Law on the Protection of Classified Information attacked by the applicants state that the decisions of the respective bodies for refusal, termination and deprivation of access is not subject to appeal in court. Article 109 of the CIPA states that they may be appealed under Articles 62-68 of the CIPA. Article 62 of the same law stipulates that the refusal, termination and revocation of a permit may be appealed to the SCIS by the interested parties. The following provisions govern the procedure. A special procedure for administrative appeal is created.

Article 68 of the CIPA stipulates that after the completion of this procedure the decision of the SCIS is final and “not subject to any appeal”.

The refusal, termination and revocation of permits issued by SCIS is also not subject to appeal under Article 69 of the CIPA.

The issue of appealing the above-mentioned acts related to classified information is not unambiguously resolved in the relevant laws of the member states or candidates for NATO membership. In some cases, judicial control is allowed, while in others various forms of administrative control are provided.

In a series of decisions - № 7/95 on c.d. № 9/95 (promulgated, SG, issue 59/95, amended, issue 60/99), № 21/95 under c.d. № 18/95 (promulgated, SG, issue 99/95), № 18/97 under c.d. № 12/97 (promulgated, SG, issue 110/97), № 4/99 under c.d. № 31/98 (promulgated, SG No. 33/99), the Constitutional Court accepted, “that judicial control over administrative acts is a constitutive element of the rule of law” (Decision № 13/93 under Art. d. № 13/93, promulgated, SG, issue 65/93) and the access to it must be open at the beginning.

However, taking into account “the great importance for the democratic and legal state of the general law for judicial control introduced by the current Constitution for legality of administrative acts (Art. 120, para 2 K)” and that with the exclusion of some administrative acts from the scope of judicial control on the grounds of Art. 120, para 2 shall not be abused (Decision № 8/99 under Code of Civil Procedure № 4/99, promulgated, SG, issue 47/99), the Constitutional Court has come to the conclusion that the exception is provided only when “another more important, but explicitly constitutionally proclaimed value must be protected as a matter of priority” before the constitutionally recognized fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens. Such a value is stated, for example, in the field of national security.

The series of decisions mentioned above, which affirm the right of judicial control over administrative acts, does not address the issue of national security and whether it or another constitutional value should be preferred. This is precisely the question raised in the disputed provisions of the CIPA. It should be borne in mind that there is no constitutionally guaranteed right of access to classified information, which is protected by the accessory right to appeal. Insofar as in this case we can speak of a "right of access" in the sense of a subjective right, it is created by virtue of the law, it is granted only to certain persons (Art. 42 of the CIPA) and after the completion of a legal procedure (Articles 43-69 of the CIPA). As a rule, this is a power as a condition for an activity related to access to classified information. In this sense, it is not only a right but also an obligation for the person concerned (for example, for employees in various services related to defense or internal affairs). Only the assessment of the body that issues the relevant acts is authoritative for the emergence of this power, and their issuance is not motivated - a situation that is not disputed by the applicants. This assessment cannot be replaced by a court judgment. 

The right of the legislator to exclude by law certain administrative acts from judicial appeal is not disputed by the Constitutional Court. In Decision № 18/97 on c.d. № 12/97 (promulgated, SG No. 110/97) he has explicitly stated that since the Constitution does not contain criteria to make this power of the National Assembly conditional, the issue is “in the sphere of of legislative competence ”.

When considering the request of the group of MPs in the present case, it should be pointed out that when the refusal, termination and revocation of the access permit have not been granted by the SCIS, they are not out of control. Article 62 of the CIPA allows them to be appealed administratively before the SCIS. The latter is the one who has the right to a final decision. The State Commission on Information Security according to Article 4, paragraph 1 of the CIPA is a state body that implements the policy of the Republic of Bulgaria for the protection of classified information. According to Article 6, paragraph 1 of the same law, its members are determined by a decision of the Council of Ministers. It follows that it is administratively independent of the structures of the Ministry of Interior. Its activity, structure and organization of work are determined by structural regulations adopted by the Council of Ministers (Article 5 of CIPA). In connection with this situation, Article 69 excludes from any appeal when the refusal, termination or revocation of a permit for classified information is given by her.

The legislator has accepted this due to the need to keep the actual secrecy of the relevant information, which is necessary from the point of view of national security.

The limitations of the judicial appeal are related to the work with classified materials, access to which may directly affect national security. Disclosure of sources and data that have led specialized bodies to refuse, suspend or revoke an authorization also affects security interests. On the other hand, the right to work is not encroached upon here (Article 48 K), as it is a question of a certain quality of the person, the existence of “reliability” within the meaning of the CIPA, without which he would not be able to carry out a certain activity. The constitutional right to work is not absolute (Decision of the Constitutional Court № 18/97, promulgated, SG, issue 110/97). Performing one job or another is often associated with a specific qualification that is required. Without it, the relevant position cannot be held. The employer has the right to assess the presence or absence of certain qualities that are necessary in a given area. In Decision № 2/99 on c.d. № 33/98 (promulgated, SG No. 8/99) The Constitutional Court has ruled that the restriction of the right to work should not be based on criteria that contradict the Constitution.

In this case, the denial, termination or revocation of access to classified information is made on the basis of constitutionally protected criteria - the interests of national security.

National security is set out in Chapter One - "Basic Principles" of the Constitution. Constitutionally, national security is guaranteed by the armed forces (Article 9 K). At the same time, Article 24, paragraph 2 of the Constitution indicates that one of the main goals of the foreign policy of the Republic of Bulgaria is national security.

The cases in which the specialized security bodies rule for protection of the classified information for state or official secret by refusing, terminating or revoking a permit for access to it are undoubtedly among the few in which the restriction of judicial control over the administrative acts is justified according to art. .120, para 2 of the Constitution. The legislator had in mind the exclusively confidential nature of the information in connection with which the above-mentioned acts were issued. The disclosure of themselves and of the sources through which they were collected, without which the proceedings in a trial could not take place, could endanger national security.

Article 35, para 1, art. 37, para 2 and art. 44, para 2 of the Constitution create restrictions on some of the basic rights of citizens proclaimed in it, such as choice of residence, movement in the country and its departure, freedom of conscience and religion and the right of association when it is in the interest of national security. The legislator has preferred the basic personal rights of citizens and the interests of national security, which affect the whole society. A constitutional value that is more significant is protected.

Therefore, Art. 57, para 5, Art. 59, para 5, Art. 60, para 5, Art. 68, Art. 69, Art. 88, para 2 and Art. 109 of the CIPA do not contradict the Constitution. .

4. The request to establish the unconstitutionality of § 37 of the transitional and final provisions of the Classified Information Protection Act

A majority of votes was not cast in the vote on whether § 37 of the CIPAA contradicts the Constitution. Therefore, the request of the MPs must be rejected. The lack of a majority for either of these prevents the court from drawing up general reasons for the decision in this part. Therefore, the opinions of the two groups of constitutional judges are presented separately.

According to Judges Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Rumen Yankov and Penka Tomcheva, the request must be rejected on the following grounds:

The impugned provision repeals the Law on Access to Documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff. According to the petitioners, the repeal of the law violates the right to information and is therefore unconstitutional.

The request is unfounded. The right of the legislator to repeal laws has so far not been challenged in any of the legal systems known to the court. The explicit repeal of a law is a basic and universally recognized way to terminate the effect of legal norms for reasons of legislative expediency. This right is explicitly stated in Article 84, item 1 of the Bulgarian Constitution.

It is doubtful in principle to what extent the annulment norm can be subject to constitutional review on the merits, insofar as its disposition has no content of its own other than a simple act of annulment. To recognize the right of the court to assess the need for already repealed laws, the existence of which is not explicitly provided for in the Constitution, means to recognize its function as a positive legislator , something inadmissible under any legal system. The need for the existence of a law that is not explicitly prescribed by the Constitution (see § 3, para. 3 of the transitional and final provisions of the Constitution) is a political issue and its resolution is within the competence of this body, which expresses the will of the politically formed majority in compliance with democratic procedures, ie - the National Assembly. According to Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the court is competent to rule only on adopted laws, but not to prescribe the adoption (existence) of specific laws. Only the parliament is sovereign to decide which categories of public relations should be regulated by a separate law, as well as the action at the time of such a law, as a rule constitutional. The court does not have such competence under the Constitution and it cannot appropriate it in this case either.  

The fact that the repealed law has passed a constitutional review is irrelevant in this case. It is pointless to mix two radically different issues - a) whether the repealed law was in conformity with the Constitution, an issue on which only the Constitutional Court has jurisdiction, and b) whether the existence of this law is still necessary and what considerations for legislative expediency justify its preservation or repeal, a matter of the exclusive competence of the National Assembly. The Constitution in Article 84, item 1 does not restrict the legislator with a requirement for repeal only of unconstitutional laws. As a rule, the National Assembly repeals laws that are constitutionally compliant.

In this line of thought, it should be noted that it is also pointless to draw arguments from the compliance of the repeal with other existing laws and the possible contradictions between them. The Constitutional Court only verifies the conformity of the disputed norm with the Constitution. He does not check the compliance or non-compliance of this repeal with other laws. The possible inconsistency between different legal norms can be a ground for unconstitutionality only in the cases when this inconsistency leads to violation of constitutional principles and norms. In all other cases, such inconsistency is a problem of legislative improvement and can be overcome by subsequent legislation.

On the other hand, in order to maintain the thesis that the repeal of a law leads to unconstitutionality due to the revocation of acquired rights, it must be proved that these rights are constitutionally protected. This will be the case when the legislative protection of fundamental constitutional rights, such as the right to life or the right to property, is repealed. In other cases, the abolition of legislative protection is obviously not a violation of the Constitution, but a matter of legislative expediency - for example, in the decriminalization of certain acts.

It was in this case that the existence of a constitutional right affected by the annulment was not proved. The allegation of the petitioners that the disputed norm violates Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is due to ignorance of the constitutional norm. Article 41, paragraph 1, sentence 1, which states that "Everyone has the right to seek, receive and impart information", regulates the so-called freedom of information. The basic essence of this freedom comes down to the prohibition of the state to restrict the free exchange of information in a democratically organized society. Freedom of information guarantees the free formation (Article 39 of the Constitution) and the expression of one's own opinion (Article 40 of the Constitution) and is an element of this fundamental right. To the extent that freedom of information may include any obligation on public authorities to provide such information, it does not apply to all or any information available to the State.      

In its interpretative decision, the Constitutional Court clarified the meaning of this norm in the system of communication rights. In the operative part of Decision № 7 of 4 June 1996 under c.d. № 1/96 (promulgated, SG No. 55/1996) the court has ruled that “The right to seek and receive information under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution covers the obligation of state bodies to provide access to public information. The content of this obligation is subject to legislative determination ". The Constitutional Court makes the clarification due to the necessity, and in a huge number of hypotheses also due to the practical impossibility to refer this obligation to any information. The reasoning of the decision also explicitly states that "the legislator is the one who, in view of the meaning of the constitutional order, must identify the variety of hypotheses in which the obligation is subject to explicit formulation". Therefore, the content of the obligation is not absolute. It is always defined in a law - an entire special law (for example, the Law on Access to Public Information - promulgated, SG, issue 55 of 2000) or separate provisions in a more general law (for example, Article 9 of the Law on Protection of Public Information). the environment - promulgated, SG No. 86/1991, amended, SG No. 26/2001).      

By the way, this is the position of the European Court of Human Rights. In its case law on the application of Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (promulgated, SG No. 80/1992, amended, SG No. 137/1998), the European Court of Justice shall explicitly noted that "Article 10 does not give the person the right to access a register which contains information about his personal situation, nor does it provide for an obligation for the government to provide such information" - (Leander judgment of 26 March 1987). The judgment in the Gaskin case of 7 July 1989, in which the applicant was denied access to his file from the period when he was a minor, is also explicit in this sense. In both cases, the court explicitly adopted the rule that the freedom of information under Article 10 of the ECHR applies only to the prohibition on the authorities from obstructing the receipt of information that other entities wish or may agree to disclose - "la liberte de recevoire des informations (…) Interdit essentially in a government of the emperor as to the reception of information that other authors may or may not consent to "fournir" (serie A n. 116, p. 28, para. 74; serie A, n. 160, § 21, para 52 ).    

In both decisions, the so-called negative aspect of freedom of information can be traced. The European Court denies that there is an obligation for the state to provide information, whether classified or not. The European regulation is an improved version of the original regulation of the freedom of information in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (promulgated, SG, issue 43 of 1976). According to Article 19, item 2 of the Covenant "Everyone has the right to freedom of expression; this right includes freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds…" However, this freedom does not create an obligation for the State to provide access to information stored by it. To the extent that it can be argued that freedom of speech involves an obligation on the authorities to provide information of public interest, notwithstanding theoretical disputes, the case law of the European Court of Justice is firmly based on the principle that only national legislators have jurisdiction to assess information of public interest. .  

The court did not agree on the nature of the information contained in the archives of the former State Security. If this information is classified, then obviously the denial of access to it is explicitly provided for in the Constitution itself for reasons of national security - Article 41, paragraph 1, sentence 2 of the Constitution. If the information is not classified, it is not clear from which constitutional norm the National Assembly has an obligation to adopt (respectively preserve) such a law. In both cases, there is no ground for unconstitutionality of the disputed norm.

Therefore, the question of whether and to what extent the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff contain public information is decided by the National Assembly. It is the only body competent to assess whether a special law is needed to provide access to such information.

In view of the current state of the legal framework, it is appropriate to note that with the Instruction on the procedure for access to information contained in the documents from the archives of the Ministry of Interior (Reg. № І-113 of 24.06.2002), the right to access personal data has been granted to the persons for whom such data have been collected and stored in the archives of the Ministry of Interior. Every Bulgarian citizen, without the mediation of a specially created body, can see, respectively receive a copy of his file, the file of the deceased spouse, relatives in the direct line without restrictions, and in the lateral - to the second degree (Article 3 of the instruction), if such a file has been created by the bodies of the former State Security and is stored in the archives of the Ministry of Interior. The right of access for research, journalistic and research activities is regulated separately according to the procedure provided in the instruction - art. 4 of the instruction. The regulation thus created corresponds to the right to information, representing a legitimate interest for the citizens - art. 41, para 2 of the Constitution. Whether this regulation should be in law or a by-law is sufficient is a matter of the competence of the National Assembly.

In view of the above, the question of the need for a special law on access to the documents of the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff is a matter of legislative expediency. Only the National Assembly is competent to assess the existence of such a need. With the disputed § 37 of the transitional and final provisions, the National Assembly has exercised its constitutional power under Article 84, item 1 of the Constitution and the request in this part should be rejected.

According to Judges Hristo Danov, Nedelcho Beronov, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov and Zhivan Belchev, the provision of § 37 of the PHCIPC contradicts the Constitution and the request for its repeal must be granted for the following reasons:

Paragraph 37 of the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (promulgated, SG No. 63/97; Decision № 10 of the Constitutional Court of 1997 - promulgated, SG No. .89/97, amended, SG No. 69/99, SG No. 24/2001, Decision № 14 of the Constitutional Court of 2001 - promulgated, SG No. 52/2001; ., SG, issue 28/2002).

The Law on Access to the Documents of the Former State Security (SDBA), promulgated, SG No. 63/97, was also attacked in its entirety before the Constitutional Court. By Decision № 10/1997 (promulgated, SG No. 89/97) they were repealed as unconstitutional provisions in connection with the circle of persons holding certain state positions, which must be checked for cooperation with the services of the former State Security and the additional provision of the law, defining as "registered collaborators" those "whose names and pseudonyms appear in the reference file and in the registration diary of the former State Security". In the rest, the Constitutional Court accepted that the law is not in conflict with the Constitution.

The Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for access to the documents of the former state security ZIDZDDBDS (promulgated, SG, issue 24/2001) was also referred to the Constitutional Court in its entirety. Procedural changes were indicated upon its adoption. Together and nevertheless, the petitioners wanted to declare unconstitutional the members involved in forming the composition, selecting and appointing the two commissions for disclosing documents and establishing affiliation with the former State Security and the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff. The establishment by the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Defense, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Director of the National Intelligence Service and the Director of the National Service for Security of Working Groups in the administrative units and services headed by them was also attacked. documents of the former State Security and the former RFB, with the task of assessing the documents that are stored in the respective service or that have been handed over to them by natural or legal persons. It was also maintained that the law discredited and damaged the honor, dignity and reputation of citizens. It was also claimed that the texts that create an obligation for preliminary verification and declaration of affiliation to the former State Security Service and the Regional Forestry Board of certain categories of persons who have held, hold or apply to hold certain public positions are also unconstitutional. Considerations were also presented against the disclosure of persons who worked in the former specialized bodies of the State Security and military intelligence in favor of national security. The request stated that the law does not guarantee that an affected citizen will be able to defend himself.

By Decision № 14 of 2001 (promulgated, SG No. 52/2001), the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional only the provision of § 5 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which amends Article 3 of the Law on the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. , letter “e” regarding the declaration as collaborators of persons against whom “there is or has been initiated or terminated preliminary proceedings” for a crime committed by them, although according to the law they are among those whose names should not be disclosed in interest in national security.

The request for unconstitutionality of all other texts of the AML / CFT Act was rejected.

It follows that the Constitutional Court has already ruled on two main objections against the law repealed by § 37 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Freedoms, from which there is no reason to deviate.

The National Assembly, which according to Article 84, item 1 of the Constitution is authorized to adopt, amend, supplement and repeal laws, has the right, of course, to repeal any law. From this point of view, the repeal of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is naturally within the powers of the National Assembly. Hence, there would be nothing that would contradict the Constitution, if the repeal of the mentioned law does not affect the basic and guaranteed by it rights of the citizens, which have already been acquired. The point is, however, that § 37 of the CIPAA repeals a law that only guarantees a fundamental constitutional right that another of the existing laws does not provide.

When the repeal of a law leaves an unsettled matter, leaving the basic rights of citizens without legal protection, the violation of the Constitution is present. In this case, this is the right to information proclaimed in Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. As one of the basic rights of the citizens it is irrevocable according to art. 57, para 1 of it. Article 41 of the Constitution, which proclaims the right to information, is in Chapter Two, entitled "Fundamental Rights and Obligations of Citizens". The temporary restriction of some of the fundamental rights can only take place "in the event of a declaration of war, martial law or another state of emergency by law." In Decision № 10/97 on c.d. № 14/97 the Constitutional Court explicitly stated that “the right of the society to receive information that is of interest to it is a fundamental constitutional right”. According to Interpretative Decision № 7/96 under c.d. № 1/96 of the Constitutional Court the right of every citizen under Art. 41, para 1 of the Constitution to seek and receive information “is guaranteed by the obligations of the state bodies to provide it”. The Constitutional Court has explicitly emphasized that from the content of the right under Art. 41, para 1 of every citizen to seek and receive information arises an obligation to provide access to information, as the content of this obligation is subject to determination by law. Therefore, in addition to the negative nature of the right to information under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, expressed in the prohibition of the state to interfere with its exercise, its content includes the obligation of the state to provide access to information. Once defined by law as socially significant, this information cannot subsequently be declared the opposite - as non-socially significant; the state cannot deprive the society of access to the already announced type of information in a subsequent period, because the right of the citizens to receive it has been acquired, and according to art. 57, para 1 of the Constitution it is inadmissible to take away acquired fundamental rights.

In addition, in the cited decision the Constitutional Court pointed out that the right under Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, traditionally treated as individual, is "associated with the formation of a common public space in which public opinion is formed" as a means of exercising democratic control. Therefore, the violation of the right to seek, receive and impart information also reflects on the process of exercising democratic control.

The law repealed by § 37 of the Law on National Consensus was created in 1997 in accordance with the declaration of the XXXVIII National Assembly for national consent (promulgated, SG No. 38/97). Point 5 of it states that "the opening of files of politicians, senior magistrates and administrators" will be supported in order to neutralize "their dependence on former security services".

The various provisions of the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security and the General Directorate of the General Staff ensured the informing of the public and individual citizens about important facts produced in the past and about circumstances that are important for them:

- search, collection, analysis and evaluation of documents containing information about the activities of the former State Security and the Regional Forestry Board;

- disclosure of the names of Bulgarian citizens who have held or are holding a public office or have performed public activity specified in the law, who have been full-time or part-time associates of the former services or have benefited from them;

- ensuring access of the affected persons to the relevant documents;

- preparation, publication and maintenance of a permanent report on the free internet access activity carried out in compliance with the law;

- possibility for the bodies, which appoint or elect persons to public positions listed in the law, to request from the established commission to carry out a preliminary check for establishing affiliation to the former DS or RUGSH of the candidates for such position;

- when scheduling elections, political parties and coalitions could request that the same be checked before the registration of candidates;

- Every Bulgarian citizen had the right to ask the relevant commission to make a reference to him, whether information was collected about him from the former State Security Service or the Regional Forestry Board and to give him the opportunity to get acquainted with it.

The law contained some exceptions for disclosing the names of full-time and part-time employees when this would endanger the national security of the country or endanger the life and personal freedom of an individual.

The repealed law, despite the improvements that would be useful, created a high opportunity for the individual citizen to understand the circumstances hidden for him for many years, because of which he suffered, and in many cases destroyed his entire life. The public could also be made aware of the methods used by the former secret services , the past and possible connections of some public figures, as well as those for whom it must express its views in the forthcoming elections.

With the repeal of the VAT Act, the society and the individual citizen are deprived of this opportunity. They have been deprived of an already acquired right to the said information. The ability of civil society to exercise control over the development of the democratic process in the country has also been taken away.

All the arguments that the information gap that has appeared can be filled by other laws and newly created by-laws are unfounded.

The seized information cannot be obtained through the Access to Public Information Act (APIA). First of all, Article 4, paragraph 1 of it excludes its application, "if another law provides for a special procedure for seeking, receiving and disseminating" public information. And based on Article 2, paragraph 3 of the same, access to personal data is excluded. Article 8, paragraph 2 of the APIA stipulates that the law does not apply to information stored in the State Archives. It follows that if some materials are transferred to the fund, access to them cannot be carried out under the APIA. Moreover, according to § 9, para 1 of the CIPAA, the materials and documents prepared before the entry into force of the law, marked with the respective degrees of secrecy, are considered to be marked with a classification level according to the CIPA, as the terms for secrecy are calculated from the date of creation of materials and documents in accordance with the same law. The APIA is not applicable when the access to information affects a third party and does not have his explicit written consent.

The Personal Data Protection Act also cannot replace the access to information provided by the Act repealed by § 37 of the Law on Personal Data Protection.

The processing of personal data for individuals can take place only after the “free and unambiguous” consent of the person whose data are processed (Art. 20, para 1 in connection with Art. 19 LPPD). According to Art. 20, para 2, item 1 of LPPD, the consent is not required when “it refers to personal data collected and processed by virtue of an obligation under law”. By order determined by law and according to art. 35, para 1, item 2, information may be obtained from the register or the documents containing public information. Pursuant to Article 25, paragraph 1, item 1 of the LPPD, after the completion of the processing of personal data, the administrator provided for in the law (natural or legal person and state body) may destroy them.

Both the APIA and the LPPD do not provide the opportunity to obtain and store the information that was allowed by the repealed VAT Act.

Pursuant to Art. 125b, para 1, item 1 of the Law on the Ministry of Interior (LMI) (promulgated, SG, issue 122/97, amended, issues 70, 73 and 153/98). No. 30 and 110/99, No. 1 and 29/2000, No. 28/2001 and No. 45/2002) The Information and Archives Directorate is the one that receives, registers and processes documents created by the services and directorates of the Ministry of Interior and creates funds for temporary and permanent preservation. It proposes to the Minister of Interior archival documents for declassification (Art. 125b, para 1, item 2) and proposes to him the procedure and the manner for destruction of the documents in the directorates and services. According to Art. 125b, para 3 of the LMI, the Minister is the one who, through the above-mentioned directorate, manages the archival fund of the ministry. In this sense is the letter to the Constitutional Court of the Minister of the Interior (Register № I 7759 of 3 July 2002) in connection with the clarification of this issue.

By letter № 1160 of 27 June 2002, the Minister of Defense informed the CS that the bulk of the archives of the former Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff were kept in an information service. Those that concern issues of a general nature and have expired in the service have been handed over to the Central Military Archives with the same degree of secrecy and a period of "eternal" storage. According to the letter, the use was made with the permission of the director of the Military Information Service, as the issue was regulated by the Manual on Archives in the Bulgarian People's Army, approved by Ministerial Order № 0440 / 17.12.1963.

The instruction of the Minister of Interior issued on 24.06.2002 on the procedure for access to information contained in the documents from the archival funds of the Ministry of Interior cannot fill the gap that remains after the repeal of the Law on the Ministry of Interior. First of all, it is not a by-law, as the instruction is, but the law, which can guarantee with certainty the constitutional right of the citizens to be informed (art. 41, para 2 K). In addition, the possible information that can be obtained according to the instruction on personal data of the person concerned or of his deceased spouse, relatives in the direct line without restriction and in the collateral line up to the second degree, as well as access to information from archival research documents, journalistic and research activities do not complete all the information provided by the repealed law. Missing opportunity:

- to disclose the names of the Bulgarian citizens who have held or are holding a public office or have performed public activity, specified in the repealed law, who have been full-time or part-time associates of the former services or have benefited from them;

- the bodies that appoint or elect persons to public positions listed in the repealed law, to request from the existing commission under the same law to carry out a preliminary check to establish affiliation to the former State Security or BFSA for the candidates for such position;

- when scheduling elections, political parties and coalitions to request that the same be checked before the registration of candidates;

- every Bulgarian citizen to ask the relevant commission to make a reference to him, whether information has been collected about him from the former State Security Service or the Regional Forestry Board and to give him the opportunity to get acquainted with it.

This instruction cannot be applied to the archives of the former General Directorate of the General Staff and the archives of the former First General Directorate of the State Security, which is stored in the archives of the National Intelligence Service, as the Minister of Interior has the right to order only in connection with your office. The instruction refers only to the archives of the Ministry of Interior.

Paragraph 37 of the LCI also takes away the possibility to apply Articles 26, items 3 and 59, para 2, item 3 of the Radio and Television Act (RTA), promulgated, SG, issue 138/98, amended. , issue 81/99, issue 79/2000, issue 96 and 112/2001, which are in force and according to which they cannot be members of the Council for electronic media, as well as of the managing boards of the Bulgarian National Television and the Bulgarian National Radio persons who were full-time or part-time associates of the former State Security.

With the repeal of the Law on State Property Management by virtue of § 37, para 1 of the CIPA, the activity of the state bodies established by it is also terminated. The tangible fixed assets of the state bodies that have terminated their operation under the repealed law shall be provided to the State Commission on Information Security (§ 37, para 2).

If it is accepted, which would be incorrect, that the terms for protection of the classified information, established in art. 34, para 1 and 2 of CIPA, also apply to the materials of the former security services (they are not specified in § 1, item. 1 of the additional provisions of the law and the facts, which establish the relevant documents, cannot be subsumed under any of the lists in the list of categories of information subject to classification as a state secret under Annex № 1 to Art. 25 CIPA), then Art. .34, para 3 of this law, according to which after the expiration of these terms and removal of the level of the classification the access to it is carried out by the order of APIA, becomes meaningless. In the meantime, the stakeholders may have long since died, and over the years they may have played the role of no longer having a public interest in historical facts that are useful to be known by future generations so that they never happen again.

Article 13 of the repealed VAT Act forbade the destruction of the documents of the former DS and RUGB. After their disclosure under the repealed law, they were to be handed over and stored in the Central State Archives. In this way, on the one hand, the preservation of the materials was guaranteed, and on the other hand, everyone was given access to the documents that had already been announced.

In the absence of a provision similar to Art. in a civilized society, the methods of past communist rule and the encroachment on tens of thousands of human destinies will not remain hidden from society and from those directly affected, and will not be destroyed.

On the other hand, there may be classified documents that do not in fact endanger our national interests, because they were created at a different time and a different environment, which are denied and have nothing to do with the current security and governance of the state.

The conclusion from the repeal of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by § 37 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is that there will be no security for keeping the archives of the former State Security and the Republic of Bulgaria, the interested parties or public organizations and mass media. It will not be possible to trace and reveal the methods and actions of the repressive services of the past. It will not be possible to check and announce the persons who have held or are holding public positions or carrying out public actions, as well as to check the affiliation to the former DS or RUGSH of those who are applying for the most responsible elected positions. The public undoubtedly needs such information and the right to receive it is given to it by the Constitution. The repeal of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities undoubtedly violates the right of everyone to seek and receive information established by Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

This right was proclaimed at the 65th plenary session of 14.12.1946 at the first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations in the section for convening an international conference on freedom of information. It is said that "freedom of information is a fundamental human right." According to the UN General Assembly, it is the cornerstone of all the freedoms to which the United Nations is committed. "Freedom of information includes the right to broadcast and publish news anywhere and without restriction." It is "a key element of all serious efforts to favor peace and progress in the world."

Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that “everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this freedom includes the right to hold opinions without hindrance and the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. " The right to information is also enshrined in Article 5, item 2 and Article 19, item 2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in Article 10, items 1 and 2 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights. and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950

Both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 3) and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Article 10, paragraph 2) provide for the possibility of certain restrictions on the right to information. They relate to an obligation to respect the rights and reputation of others, national security, public order, the authority of justice, public health and morals. Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria also contains restrictions on the right to seek and receive information, which are in accordance with the above. They are listed: the law cannot be directed against the rights and good name of other citizens, as well as against national security, public order, public health and morals. Pursuant to Article 41, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, no information may be requested on circumstances which constitute a state or other secret protected by law or affect foreign rights.

In Decision № 10/1997 of the Constitutional Court, which has already been cited, assuming that the right of society to receive information is a fundamental constitutional right, at the same time it is said that it is not absolute. Absolute rights by their nature, according to the Constitutional Court, are the restrictions of this right, explicitly written in Article 41, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. In interpreting this text in Decision № 7/1996, the Constitutional Court says that in adopting the texts set for interpretation “the constitutional legislator was guided and brought in the text” of Chapter Two of the Constitution, referring to the fundamental rights and obligations of citizens, "ideas and permits from the two international pacts (treaties) ratified at that time and entered into force for the Republic of Bulgaria - the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights". The interpretative decision of the Constitutional Court indicates that the exceptions provided for in Article 41 of the Constitution are subject to restrictive interpretation. The rights under Articles 39 - 41 of the Constitution "are the basis of the democratic process and contribute to its functioning", it is said in section I, para 3 of the operative part of the decision. Decision № 14/2001 on c.d. № 7/2001 complied with and adopted the opinions of the Constitutional Court under Decision № 10/1997. It was accepted that the disclosure of the names of the full-time and part-time associates of the former State Security and RUGB did not harm the honor, dignity and good name of the persons. It is pointed out that the incompatibility established in § 2a, para 2 of the additional provisions of the ACSAA for holding some of the most responsible public positions with performing activity as a full-time or part-time associate of an active Bulgarian intelligence or security service is not violated. the constitutional right to work, as everyone has the right to choose in which of the two spheres to invest their efforts and to exercise it. The Constitutional Court has also held that disclosing the names of Bulgarian citizens who were full-time or part-time associates of the former State Security Service or the Regional Forestry Board or were beneficiaries of them does not contradict the preamble of Article 9 of the Constitution.

Article 25 of the CIPA stipulates that a state secret is the information listed in Annex на 1 to the text of the law. From the categories of information listed in this list, subject to classification as a state or official secret, it can be seen that none of the items on this list refers to and cannot refer to the information and documents of the former State Security and RUGB, which are disclosed under the force of the repealed law. First of all, the enumeration of the security services, which makes § 1 of the additional provisions of the CIPA, shows that in the sense of it the security services are the current state structures in the Republic of Bulgaria, and not the former special services. The same § 1, item 14 indicates the interests of the current Republic of Bulgaria, and not the interests of the former People's Republic, a member of the Warsaw Pact. Therefore, all the information listed in Annex № 1 to Article 25 of the CIPA, including in Section II, item 5 (data that may help to identify persons who are not employees, but cooperate or have cooperated with the services for security and public order) cannot refer to the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria and its present security bodies.

As early as 1994 (promulgated, SG No. 86/94), which was not repealed by the CIPA, the National Assembly adopted that “Information on the organization, methods and means in the performance of the specific tasks of the bodies of State security, as well as the intelligence information of these bodies, relating to or related to the period up to 13 October 1991, shall not be considered as constituting a state secret within the meaning of items 19 and 20 of the List of Facts, Information and Subjects Constituting a State Secret of the Republic of Bulgaria ”(promulgated, SG, issue 31 of 1990, amended, issues 90 and 99 of 1992). And with § 43 PZRZZKI also this list is canceled.

In point 9 of its Resolution 96 1096/96 on measures to destroy the legacy of the former communist totalitarian systems, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe "welcomes the opening of the archives of the secret services to public scrutiny in some former communist totalitarian countries". The resolution advises all these countries "to enable the persons concerned to check, at their request, the files which the former secret services have kept for them". Point 15 of the Resolution recommends that the authorities in the above-mentioned countries "verify that their laws, regulations and procedures comply with the principles contained in this resolution and correct them if necessary".

In accordance with all the above-mentioned acts of the international organizations of which Bulgaria is a member, the so-called experts on international law, national security and human rights adopted on October 1, 1995, are also adopted. Johannesburg Principles. It should be noted that the recommendations of Resolution 1096/1996 and the compliance of the legislation with the above-mentioned number of international acts were implemented by the former communist countries, which adopted laws to disclose the files of the repressive services of the totalitarian regime. The former Czechoslovakia passed a law as early as October 1991. A law of 8 March 2002 amending Law Закон 140/96 on access to files created by the former State Security and certain other laws is in force in the Czech Republic today. In Hungary, Act XXIII of 1994 on the screening of persons holding high public and public office, as well as on the file service, is in force. In Poland, the Law on the Work or Service of Persons Performing Public Functions in the State Security Bodies or Cooperation with Them for the Period 1944-1999 was adopted on 11 April 1997. Romania has its own Law № 187/99 on access to the personal file and the disclosure of the Securitate as a political police. In Germany, this issue was resolved in December 1991 with a law on documents of the State Security Service of the former GDR (Stasi Documents Act).

In this comparative legal environment, the CIPA repealed by § 37 of the TFR the only law that allowed the storage and disclosure of documents on the organization and activities of the former State Security and the BFSA, to disclose the names of persons holding responsible public positions and performing responsible public activity, and it under a series of conditions related to national security considerations, as well as to check in advance the candidates for some of the highest state positions. The repealed law also provided an opportunity to get acquainted with the materials that the former repressive authorities had collected for them within a period that was still useful for those interested.

The repeal of the SDBDSRUGSH directly affects both the interests of the society, which has the right to know its past and the methods of the services that determined it, and the affected, whose lives have been miserable, being deprived of the most basic human rights. rights and the right to a happy and peaceful life. In addition, history is deprived of sources of information, without which it cannot properly characterize and give an objective assessment of both the period during which the former State Security Service and the WWG operated, as well as themselves as institutions.

The deprivation of these opportunities violates Art. 41 and Art. 57, para. 1 of the Constitution, due to which § 37 of the PHCIP is unconstitutional.

On the basis of all the above and in the absence of an achieved majority of the members of the Constitutional Court to issue a decision under § 37 of the RHIPCI on the grounds of Art. 149, para 2, item 2 and Art. 151, para 1 of the Constitution the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of 57 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly to declare the unconstitutionality of the following provisions of the Classified Information Protection Act (promulgated, SG No. 45/2002): Art. 35, para 1 and 5, Art. .43, para 5, art. 57, para 5, art. 59, para 5, art. 60, para 5, and § 37 of the transitional and final provisions.

