Opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev

On the grounds of art. 35, para 1 and 5 of CIPA

I signed the operative part of the decision on Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5 of the CIPA, because I accept that it does not contradict the Constitution, as it does not state that the register, which is intended to be kept by the State Commission on Information Security, is not is public but secret. However, I do not agree with the reasons for the decision of the Constitutional Court on this issue, which assume that the register is confidential.

My considerations are the following:

Article 35, paragraph 1 of the CIPA does not state whether the register of materials and documents containing classified information constituting a state or official secret, which must be kept by the SCIS, is public or secret. Paragraph 5 of the same text stipulates that “the procedure for submitting data for entry in the register, as well as the conditions and the procedure for making inquiries from it shall be determined in the regulations for application of law”. It cannot be inferred from that provision that the register is not public, as the applicants claim. A state secret according to Article 25 of the CIPA is the information specified in the list under Annex №1 to Article 25 of the CIPA. Documents, information and data outside this list do not constitute a state secret. Whether the register under Art. 35, para 1 constitutes a state or official secret and should therefore be classified as secret, depends on the data it must contain. Article 35, paragraph 2 of the CIPA lists them. None of them may fall under any of the items in the list of categories of information subject to classification as a state secret, nor disclose an official secret. This also applies to Section II, item 20 of this list, where the information “about the organization, methods and means serving for protection of the classified information, representing a state secret” is indicated. Art. 25 of the list regarding electronic registers, diaries for registration of documents, because none of the content of the register, indicated in art. 35, para 2 of CIPA, is classified as information constituting a state secret. In this sense are the opinions of the Minister of Interior and the National Security Service.

Article 35, paragraph 2 of the CIPA indicates what the register under paragraph 1 contains. It can show which is the organizational unit that issued the material or document, when it was created and when the classification level should be removed, the legal basis for the classification with the security seal or that the security level has been terminated or removed. None of these indications may provide information about the organization itself, about the methods and means used to protect classified information that is a state or official secret. This cannot be seen from the identification number of the material or the document under which it appears in the register (Article 35, paragraph 2, item 3 of the CIPA). There is nothing behind the identification number that can reveal exactly what material or document is in question, or what its content is. If, however, the legislator considered that the identification number contained any secret data, he should have included it in the list under Annex № 1 to Article 25 of the CIPA.

In the regulations for its application provided for in Article 35, paragraph 5 of the CIPA, it is not possible to supplement the list under Annex № 1 to Article 25 of the law, including the register provided for in Article 35, paragraph 1 or a separate point of it, nor to declare its secrecy. The list has the rank of a law because it is an annex to an article of the law and changes in it can only be made by law. The regulations may not classify documents and materials that the law itself has not declared secret.

However, the non-disclosure of the register does not lead to the conclusion that it is secret. If the CIPA stated that the register was secret, then this would be contrary to Article 41 of the Constitution, as it does not contain, as already mentioned, any state or official secret. This would prevent interested public organizations and citizens from checking whether the declassification deadlines are met, whether there are changes to the secrecy period, as well as whether the materials are available or destroyed. Without being aware of this, the right provided for in Article 33, paragraph 5 of the CIPA to appeal to the SAC against the decision of the SCIS for destruction of information could not be used. And this would contradict in essence the real possibility for exercising the right under art. 120, para 2 of the Constitution.

It follows that the failure to state explicitly in Article 35, paragraph 1 of the CIPA that the register is public is not in violation of either Article 41 or Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The same applies to the allegation of unconstitutionality of Article 35, paragraph 5 of the CIPA, which stipulates that regulations will determine the procedure for providing data for entry in the register, as well as the conditions for the procedure for making inquiries from it. If the regulations would deny access to information in the register, which would practically be classified, then it would be contrary to the CIPA.

For these reasons, and not for the reasons indicated in the reasons for the decision, there is no reason to respect the request for establishing the unconstitutionality of Article 35, paragraphs 1 and 5 of the CIPA.
