JUDGMENT № 5
Sofia, 26 September 2002
constitutional case № 5/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Penka Tomcheva
(Promulgated, SG No. 95 of 8 October 2002)

 

 

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva - Rapporteur

The case was initiated at the request of a panel of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fourth Civil Division (SCC, IV year) to declare unconstitutionality of § 6a of the transitional and final provisions of the Law on Transformation and Privatization of State and Municipal Enterprises (LPPDOP, promulgated). .,SG, issue 38/92, amended, SG No. 45/96, amended, SG No. 20/2000, etc.). The considerations are that in the judicial application of the said provision under gr.d. № 76/2001 according to the inventory of the Supreme Court of Cassation, IV year the court panel found that the disputed provision put in a more favorable position the privatized or privatized enterprise, owned by a subject with sovereign powers, by other legal and economic entities, which violated Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. As a result, the constitutionally established principles of the rule of law (Article 4, paragraph 1) and the inviolability of private property (Article 17, paragraphs 3 and 5) were affected. The impugned provision led to the unconstitutional forcible expropriation of private property.

In accordance with Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the court panel suspended the consideration of the said case and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution submitted the issue to the Constitutional Court on 07.03.2002.

In the meantime, on March 13, 2002, the 39th National Assembly adopted a new Law on Privatization and Post-Privatization Control (PCPA), promulgated, SG, issue 28 of March 19, 2002, in force since March 23, 2002. § 12 of the transitional and final provisions of the said new law, the previous LPPDOP was completely repealed, for which the disputed provision of § 6a has already been referred to the Constitutional Court. Simultaneously with § 17, para 6 of the TFP of the new law for the cases of concluded privatization contracts as of the date of its entry into force it is provided for the provision of § 6a of the TFR of the claims of private and public creditors to the privatized enterprise repealed LPPDOP in connection with Article 142 of the Tax Procedure Code.

Due to the mentioned legislative changes by order № 55 of 30.05.2002 and letter № 76/2001 of the same date the petitioner has notified the Constitutional Court that he supports the request both for § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP and for § 17, para. .6 of the TFP of the new PCPA.

By a ruling of 11 June 2002, the Constitutional Court admitted for consideration on the merits the initial (for § 6a) and supplemented (for § 17, para. 6) request as upheld by the petitioners and constituted parties to the case.

The views of interested parties are as follows:

The National Assembly does not express a definite opinion on the request. The Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce substantiate the thesis that the request is unfounded. In summary, it is maintained that the disputed provision achieves a balance between the interests of creditors and investors, and in view of the other provisions of the law declared under § 6a claims can be included in the economic and legal analysis of the privatized enterprise in order to ensure their satisfaction.

In the opposite sense is the opinion of the Supreme Bar Council, according to which the provision of § 6a deprives specific legal entities of their rights, "without providing them with adequate protection in case of missed deadlines." There was "inadmissible procedural privilege and at the same time unfavorable material consequences, constituting deprivation of subjective rights of creditors". The requirement for urgent notification of a body that is outside the obligatory relationship of creditors and debtors constitutes a "violation of the principles and norms of the Constitution and of the legal order established for thousands of years."

The Constitutional Court, having considered the request in comparison with the constitutional provisions and the opinions of the parties, accepts the following:

І. On the scope of the unconstitutionality review

The supported request for the texts of the two laws and the attached legislative approach to repeal the entire previous law, and at the same time to "resurrect" part of it in the new law by explicitly referring to a specific provision of the already repealed law requires the Constitutional Court to rule , as maintained: for unconstitutionality of the initially disputed provision of § 6a of the TFP of LPPDOP (repealed) and of the provision of § 17, para 6 of the TFP of the current PCPA (in which it is incorporated). Insofar as the additionally disputed provision of § 17, para 6 of the new privatization law, apart from the reference to § 6a, also contains new provisions, they do not change the purpose and essence of § 6a. Additionally, the disputed provision of § 17, para 6 of the TFP of the new law has a more limited scope - it refers to privatization contracts that were concluded before the entry into force of the new law, and is in connection with Article 142 of The Tax Procedure Code. In fact, it is a matter of challenging a single legislative decision, formulated in § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP, which is contained in the two laws - repealed and in force, inextricably linked due to the adopted legislative approach.

In view of this, the inspection for violation of the Constitution covers the text of § 6a of the TFP of the repealed law. It is also decisive for § 17, para 6 of the current law, which in turn is applicable only to concluded privatization contracts under the repealed privatization law.

ІІ. On the merits of the request

1. It is understood from the content of the disputed provision that in order not to lose the possibility to file a claim for their receivables from privatized, respectively already privatized (§ 17, para 6) enterprises, the private and public creditors followed in the 6a six-month term and order to declare them in writing before the respective body under art. 3, para 1 LPPDOP, to whom the law with art. 3, para 4 LPPDOP assigns to prepare and conclude the privatization deals. The impugned provision contains: a) a requirement for a certain action by the creditors of enterprises, announced for privatization through a respective publication in the State Gazette; b) 6-month term for performing the action and the consequences of not declaring.

The rule formulated in § 6a and transferred to § 17, para 6 of the current law, applicable after 23.03.2002, when the new law enters into force only in respect of concluded privatization contracts during the validity of the repealed LPPDOP, does not contain signs of unconstitutionality.

2. The regulation is intended for the implementation of a fundamental economic reform - privatization (called privatization in the law). The privatization itself, carried out in pursuance of a political decision, is in line with the constitutional norms of Article 17, paragraph 4, according to which the regime of state and municipal property is determined by law and Article 19, paragraph 1, which decrees that the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria be based on free economic initiative. Dedicated to privatization, the Law on Public Procurement (repealed) and the Public Procurement Act regulate in detail the issues related to privatization. The impugned provision covers some of these issues and is intended to regulate certain legal relations that arose before the opening of the privatization procedure, which are important for three groups of legal and business entities - the privatized enterprise, its creditors and prospective buyers of the enterprise. .

3. With the requirement contained in § 6a, addressed to the creditors of state and municipal enterprises announced for privatization, they are not deprived of the right to claim, the right of ownership, but are directed within a certain period to take a formal action, namely to secure these rights over their claims against that category of debtors. The provision does not discredit or favor the interests of anyone. The disputed regime for these claims, established by § 6a, is derived from the objectives of privatization, which is not contested and cannot continue indefinitely.

4. In case of urgent implementation of the legal prescription, several effects are achieved: the creditor notifies of his claim, which guarantees him the opportunity to seek it in court in the future (in order to receive it from the new owner of the privatized enterprise, respectively apply for the purchase by the order of art. 29, para 2 of LPPDOP). The privatization bodies (under Art. 3, para 1), and through them the candidate-buyers shall receive the information due to them about the actual financial and economic condition of the enterprise announced for privatization. This information is important for determining the real privatization price. The final result is an opportunity to conclude an optimal for the parties, and therefore a stable privatization deal, while at the same time guaranteeing the rights of third parties to the privatization relationship, such as the creditors of the privatized enterprise.

5. In the event of inaction, the creditor "loses his right to claim these claims". This procedural restriction is a legal incentive for operational conduct. The loss of the right of action will be the result of the passive conduct of the creditor in preserving his property and the legal mechanisms for its protection, and not because its provision deprives him of the said rights. The disputed provision does not lead to the forcible expropriation of the property of the creditor's claims, contrary to Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. It guarantees and protects the right of ownership over the specified category of receivables, as obliged by Article 17, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

6. The diversity and specificity of the different economic spheres presupposes the need for different legal regimes for the efficient implementation of their respective different activities. The process of privatization as a legal basis for the creation of new, qualitatively different business entities is characterized by certain specifics, which necessarily requires the application of a flexible regulatory approach to achieve the goals of privatization - speed, stability of transactions and efficiency of newly created business units. Due to such necessity, under certain conditions some constitutional norms allow a nuanced legislative decision. Thus, the constitutional rule of Art. 19, para 2, according to which the law creates and guarantees to all citizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity, is not absolute. It refers to the same legal conditions for all economic and legal entities carrying out the same or similar activities in a certain field, but not necessarily equality between all different economic spheres. Considerations for expediency, as well as the existence of a need to achieve socially priority and significant goals, such as the goals of privatization, allow for differences in legislative decisions, without contradicting the constitutional principle under Article 19, paragraph 2. In a similar sense are other decisions of the Constitutional Court, such as Decision № 9/99 on c.d. № 8/99, promulgated, SG, issue 57/99, Decision № 30/98 under c.d. № 23/98, promulgated, SG, issue 137/98. In areas outside the economic one, not less significant than it, the legislative practice applies decisions similar to the disputed provision - art. 267 CPC, art. 227, para 3 of the CPA, art. 57, para 4 of the PPC, etc.

7. The requirement introduced by the disputed provision for the creditor's claim to be declared before the respective body under Art. 3 of the LPPDOP, ie. before a body "foreign to the legal relationship from which it arose" does not contradict constitutional norms. This requirement is caused by the specifics of the privatization process. The bodies under Article 3 of the LPPDOP are not arbitrary, but legally determined. They are assigned to adopt decisions for privatization of state and municipal enterprises (Article 3, paragraph 1 of the LPPDOP), the management bodies of state enterprises of these bodies "are obliged to provide them with the documents and information necessary for the privatization transaction" (Article 4a). Therefore, the contested requirement to notify those authorities does not in any way prejudice the interests of creditors. Conversely, with this requirement, due to a body external to the bond relationship, but explicitly specified by law to carry out the privatization, creditors are in a way guaranteed for their claims.

8. The legislative decision regarding the term referred to in § 6a is not unconstitutional. According to the court panel, in practice and theory there was a dispute over the legal characteristics of the term, but nevertheless its legal introduction affected "all receivables with the addressee of the privatized enterprise, regardless of the grounds, type and amount."

The question of the legal characteristics of the term is irrelevant to the question of the constitutionality of the disputed provision. If necessary, this issue can be resolved in the order of interpretation by the General Assembly of the Civil Collegium of the Supreme Court of Cassation.

The allegation that this affected all receivables with the addressee of the privatized enterprise is incorrect. With the amendment of the provision (SG, issue 20/2000) the receivables for remuneration are excluded from this category. The diversity in terms of the type, amount and basis of the claims, which are subject to written declaration according to the requirement of § 6a, does not substantiate, but refutes the thesis of unconstitutionality. It is obvious that the legal conditions for all creditors of the company announced for privatization are the same, regardless of the type, amount and basis of their receivables.

9. The provision of art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution, according to which the private property is inviolable, contains a prohibition for disposing of it without or despite the disagreement of the owner. The rule of § 6a does not disregard the will of the creditor of the privatized, resp. privatized enterprise in respect of its own receivables. It is possible to exercise the right within a certain period. The length of the term is irrelevant, because there are no constitutional requirements regarding the terms. Their diversity in law - statute of limitations, preclusive, terms for exercising procedural rights, terms for restriction of certain personal rights in criminal law, etc., and their dependence on the diversity and development of the respective public relations for which they are intended, determines the differences in their duration.

10. The constitutional principle for the rule of law under Art. 4, para 1 means the existence of order, rules in the exercise of power. The state is legal when it is governed by the Constitution and laws. Laws, in turn, should be clear, precise and unconstitutional.

The disputed § 6a, as already noted, does not contradict Article 17, paragraphs 3 and 5 and Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The provision regulates certain legal relations, which due to the ongoing privatization need additional regulation in order to comply with this principle. A legal rule has been created to address life-threatening needs that affect all legal entities in the field of privatization, directly or indirectly related to it. Therefore, the provision of § 6a does not contradict Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

The reference to the minutes of the plenary sessions shows that the disputed provision was adopted on 14 May 1996 in compliance with the requirements of Article 81 and Article 88 of the Constitution.

In conclusion, the conclusion that is necessary is that with the disputed provision of § 6a of the TFP of LPPDOP (repealed) and included in the provision of § 17, para. 6 of the current PCPA, the indicators indicated by the petitioners or other constitutional norms have not been violated.

For the stated reasons according to art. 22, para 1 of the LCS the request, based on the provision of art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution, should be rejected, due to which the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Rejects the request of a panel of judges of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Fourth Civil Division to declare unconstitutional § 6a of the transitional and final provisions of the Law on Transformation and Privatization of State and Municipal Enterprises, promulgated, SG, issue 38/92, amended ., issue 42/2001, repealed, and of § 17, para 6 of the transitional and final provisions of the current Law for privatization and post-privatization control, promulgated, SG, iss. 28/2002

 

 