Special opinion of Judge Hristo Danov
I believe that the decision made today under c.d. № 5/2002 is incorrect for the following reasons:
1. The term provided for in the provision of § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP is preclusive, not statute-barred. Therefore, by not observing it by virtue of the effect of the law itself, it is extinguished and ceases to exist. In that regard, it seems to me that the argument that it is a limitation period is unfounded. The statute of limitations is not applied ex officio and therefore the announcement of repayment of creditors' receivables takes place precisely by virtue of the law itself and not at the initiative of the debtor.
2. The receivables represent part of the right of ownership in the sense of art. 17, para 3 of the Constitution and in this direction are the explicit motives of Decision № 2/2000 (promulgated, SG, issue 29/2000). which I share. In this direction is the article of Dr. Yu.n. Pavel Stefanov The concept of "property" according to the Constitution ". Mr. Contemporary Law, 2001, № 6. This is a fundamental right that cannot be violated.
3. By virtue of the provision of Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, the law must create equal legal conditions for economic activity of all citizens and legal entities. By Decision № 19/93 (promulgated, SG No. 4/94) the Constitutional Court has adopted the following verbatim: “by virtue of Article 86 of the Constitution, the National Assembly has the right to adopt laws on any issues without to be provided for any conditions or requirements in their subject and content, as long as they do not contradict the general principles and rules of the Constitution. ”
In the reasons and item 2 of the operative part of its decision the Constitutional Court has explicitly accepted that "in the exercise of private property all legal entities are equal". I consider this decision to be fundamental to resolving this case now, and I do not see why it should be abandoned. Moreover, the provision of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution is a fundamental right in the structure of the rule of law, which by virtue of this decision limits the possibilities of the National Assembly to create laws that contradict it. The economic expediency, which obviously guided the legislator in creating this norm, cannot be a ground for non-observance of the basic requirements of the Constitution.
This fundamental right cannot be derogated from by law and unequal relations can be created between the individual economic entities in our country. In this case, receivables representing part of the property of a subject are repaid by law, which is equivalent to their forcible confiscation, without proper compensation - Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. In this case, the operation is carried out by already created inequality of economic entities.
In view of the above, I find that the norm of § 6a of the TFP of the LPPDOP is inconsistent with the Constitution and its above provisions, therefore the decision in this case is incorrect and followed the request to be granted.