JUDGMENT № 6
Sofia, 1 October 2002
constitutional case № 9/2002
Judge-Rapporteur Lyudmil Neykov (Promulgated, SG No. 95
of 8 October 2002)

Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov - Rapporteur, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva

The case was instituted on 29 April 2002 at the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria. It is requested to establish the unconstitutionality of the provision of art. 57a, item 2 of the Physical Education and Sports Act (LFSA), promulgated, SG, issue 58/1996, amended. andsuppl., SG 53/97, issue 124/1998, issue 51/1999, issue 81/1999, issue 53/2000, issue 64/2000 . and No. 75/2002. It is alleged that the challenged provision contradicts Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 60 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as it does not provide for the possibility for the state to oblige natural and legal persons to pay to various departments and bodies for management of deductions from the revenues from the lawful activity exercised by them. The only possibilities for imposing financial obligations are those specified in Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and their supplementation cannot be done by law. Such an action would also violate the constitutional principle of justice, as the challenged provision burdens only sports organizations, and without taking into account their income and property.

By a ruling of 21 May 2002, the Constitutional Court allowed the examination of the Prosecutor General's request on the merits and constituted as interested parties in the case: the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance, the Chairman of the State Agency for Youth and Sports, the Bulgarian Sports Union. and the Professional Football League.

In pursuance of the opportunity provided by the Constitutional Court, opinions were received from the interested parties.

The written statements of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Finance and the Chairman of the State Agency for Youth and Sports state that the disputed provision is constitutional and the request should be rejected as unfounded. It is pointed out that the deductions provided for in the challenged provision are made from acquired revenues from legal transactions, such as transfers of athletes, and are paid to the budget of the State Agency for Youth and Sports, which is part of the national budget. It is maintained that this is done in accordance with the constitutional obligation of the state to promote the development of sports and tourism according to Article 52, paragraph 3 of the Constitution.

The opinion of the Professional Football League supports the request of the Prosecutor General to repeal Article 57a of the LFVS. It is pointed out that the football clubs as commercial companies by virtue of art. 57, para 2 ZFVS pay only taxes and fees according to their constitutional obligation under art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution. It is argued that the need to support the development of any area of ​​public life cannot be grounds for obliging legal entities with financial obligations not provided for by the Constitution in favor of the state and its bodies.

After the admission by the Constitutional Court for consideration of the request of the Prosecutor General of the Republic of Bulgaria and the receipt of written statements from the constituted interested parties, the National Assembly adopted a Law amending the Law on Physical Education and Sports ( promulgated, SG No. 75 of 2.08. 2002). According to an additional provision - § 34 - throughout the law the words “the chairman of the State Agency for Youth and Sports” and “the State Agency for Youth and Sports” are replaced by “Minister of Youth and Sports” and “Ministry of Youth and Sports” respectively. The amendment is taken into account in the following statement.

In order to rule on the request, the Constitutional Court took into account the following:

With Art. 57a ZFVS, the legislator has indicated the sources through which funds come from the budget of the Ministry of Youth and Sports (MMC). The attacked point two of this provision imposes an obligation on sports organizations to participate in the collection of revenues from the budget of the IMC through deductions in the amount of three percent of their revenues from the transfer of athletes, the funds raised are used to finance activities with children and adolescents in the respective sport. This norm essentially establishes additional financial burdens, apart from the tax obligations established by Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, expressed in the form of deductions of amounts from revenues from legally executed transfer transactions. Along with the existing obligation for the payment of the respective tax on income from transfer transaction, the obligation to make a deduction from this income in favor of the budget of the IMC is also imposed.

The disputed provision has no constitutional basis. There is no constitutional norm from which to derive the existence of a power of any state body to assign to natural and legal persons other financial burdens, including for financing the activity for children and adolescents in the respective sport, apart from the payment of taxes and fees. . It is indisputable that such a financial burden is the disputed obligation imposed by Article 57, item 2 of the LFVS. The constitutional provision creates only an obligation to pay taxes and fees, but not obligations to make deductions from amounts realized in the performance of an activity permitted by law.

The argument that the Constitution does not explicitly exclude the possibility, along with the obligation to pay statutory taxes on revenues, to make deductions from these revenues in favor of the budget of state bodies, cannot give a constitutional character to the challenged legal norm. The provision of Art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution exhaustively indicates the financial obligations to the state - taxes and fees. This excludes the possibility of expanding their circle. There is no obligation between them, although established by law, to make deductions of amounts from acquired revenues from transactions, along with their taxation, which has its constitutional basis in Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

In this regard, the obligation imposed by the impugned provision to make the disputed deductions cannot be equated with the obligation to pay taxes and fees regulated by Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution due to the different legal and economic characteristics of these concepts. While the deduction represents the allocation of funds with a specific purpose or a reduction, a deduction from a certain amount, the tax, as the Constitutional Court has already had the opportunity to clarify with Decision № 8/97 under c.d. № 3/97, is a mandatory payment, determined unilaterally by the state, according to the income and property of taxable persons.

The fact that the law provides for deductions from acquired revenues from transfers of athletes and the amounts to be transferred by sports organizations in the budget of the IMC, respectively in the state budget, does not give grounds for expanding the range of defined by Article 60, para. .1 of the Constitution financial obligations - taxes and fees. The deduction of amounts from acquired revenues is not provided for as an obligation to the state by the Constitution. It is therefore irrelevant that the contested provision prescribes the payment of the deductions made to the budget of the MMC. Funds under it may not be raised through revenues received in a manner that is not based on constitutional principles.

The court considers that the principle of the rule of law enshrined in Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution excludes the right of the legislator to establish specific financial burdens in the form of hidden tax liabilities, as is the case with the challenged provision.

Manifestation of the constitutional principles of the rule of law and legality is compliance with the framework within which is imposed by Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution the obligation to pay only taxes and fees established by law, but not any deductions from amounts realized by activity permitted by law.

The power of the state to assign through its bodies the disputed monetary obligation is not contained in the provision of Article 52, paragraph 3 of the Constitution, which commands it to promote the development of sports and tourism. This is because the obligation of the state to “promote the development of sports and tourism” provided by the Constitution cannot be objectified by imposing by its bodies the compulsory deductions of amounts of income acquired by sports organizations, along with the obligation to pay tax. on them, which is in fact done with the disputed legal provision.

For the stated reasons the norm of art. 57a, item 2 of 3FVS contradicts the provisions of art. 4, para 1 and art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution.

This opinion on the unconstitutionality of the provision of Art. 57a, item 2 of the LFVS is also supported by the already expressed understanding of the Constitutional Court in similar cases, which it expressed with decisions № 8/1997 under c.d. № 3/1997 and № 31/1998 under c.d. № 24/1998

In view of the above and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court

RESOLVED:

Declares unconstitutional the norm of Art. 57a, item 2 of the Law on Physical Education and Sports, promulgated, SG, issue 58/1996, amended. and suppl., SG, issue 53/1997, issue 124/1998, issue 51/1999, issue 81/1999, issue 53/2000, issue 64 / 2000 and issue 75/2002

 