
Page 1
SOLUTION № 7Sofia, October 1, 2002constitutional case № 10/2002Judge-Rapporteur Stefanka Stoyanova(Promulgated, SG No. 95 of October 8, 2002)The Constitutional Court composed of: Hristo Danov - Chairman, members: GeorgiMarkov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova,Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev,Penka Tomcheva,with the participation of Secretary-Protocol Galina Dobreva examined indoorshearing on 1 October 2002 constitutional case № 10/2002, reported byJudge Stefanka Stoyanova.The case was instituted on May 22, 2002 at the request of 48 peoplerepresentatives of the XXXIX National Assembly.The request is based on Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution. She's with himchallenged the constitutionality of the following provisions of the Law onPrivatization and Post-Privatization Control (PCPA) - SG, issue 28 of March 19, 2002d .: art.3, para.2 and 4, art.6, para.4, art.11, art.16, para.1, item 5 in the part concerning the words “regardingtheir legality ”and § 22 of the transitional and final provisions.By order of 11 June 2002, the application was granted for examination underessence and as interested parties the National Assembly is constituted,The Council of Ministers, the Minister of Economy, the Minister of Justice,Privatization Agency, Supreme Court of Cassation, Supreme CourtAdministrative Court and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria.Within the given term, all of them submitted written statements on the caseinterested parties with the exception of the Supreme Court of Cassation and the Supreme CourtAdministrative Court.The Constitutional Court discussed the request, assessed the considerationscontained therein and in the written observations submitted, and in order to rule,Consider the following:Under Art. 3, para 2 and 4 of the PCPAAccording to the request, these provisions are in contradiction with Art. 17 and Art. 140 ofThe Constitution. In contesting them, it is maintained that the regulation in them of the conditions andthe procedure regarding the adoption of a decision for privatization of municipal propertyrestricts municipalities in disposing of their property and its use ininterest of the territorial community, deprives of legal protection their right toproperty and infringes the constitutional principle of the inviolability ofprivate property.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria, in whose opinion it is pointed out that the provisions of Article 3, paragraphs 2 and 4 of the PCPAannouncement of municipal property for privatization "by law" and by"A state body such as the Privatization Agency" contradicts not onlyof art. 17 and art. 140 of the Constitution, but also of the principles of the localself-government, the rule of law and free enterprise,promulgated by Art. 2, para 1, Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 19 of the Constitution.The other opinions stated that the request was unfounded becausethe disputed para 2 and 4 of art. 3 of the PCPA, as they do not deprive the municipalities of the opportunity themselvesto determine both the property that will be announced for privatization and
Page 2
2the procedure for opening a privatization procedure does not actually restrictthe exercise of the right of ownership.The Constitutional Court finds the request in this part unfounded.The provision of art. 3, para 2 of the PCPA refers to the procedure for declaringmunicipal property for privatization. It is assigned to municipal councilsthe adoption within a specified period of two lists. One of them must coverthe municipal participation in the capital of the commercial companies, which will “be considered asannounced for privatization with the promulgation in the State Gazette of the list. INthe other should include the municipal participation that will be declared forprivatization under the conditions of Art. 3, para 3, item 2 of the PCPA - when from the municipalthe council adopts a specific decision for the respective company. Yesthe envisaged order is not inconsistent with Art. 17 and Art. 140 of the Constitution.According to Article 1, paragraph 2 of the PCPA "privatization is a transfer through sale"of the property under items 1 - 3. The actions for its implementation undoubtedly haveadministrative nature. To perform these actions are not availableintroduced any restrictions regarding the municipalities with para 2 of art. 3ZPSK. It is true that the provision provides for the adoption of those lists,the first of which, after its promulgation in the State Gazette, has the meaning ofan act initiating the privatization procedure as described thereinproperty. However, the legislation does not set any requirements for the number, type,the purpose or the assessment of the companies with municipal participation incapital to be included in the lists. And the absence in art. 3, para 2 of the PCPAof such and other requirements as far as the content of the lists providespossibility for self-determination and formation of this content bymunicipal councils as bodies of local self-government. Defining it, theythey themselves specify which companies with municipal participation in the capital willbe privatized and themselves indicate for each of the companies in which of the liststo be included. In this way, they specify the objects for privatization andthey themselves choose the order for its announcement - under para 2, sentence 1 or under para 3, item 2 of art.The autonomy they have in making decisions in this direction,allows them to report all related tothe privatization of the commercial circumstances, the consideration of which isnecessary in view of the principles of local self-government. Therefore notit can be considered that the municipalities are deprived of the opportunity to take into account yesassess the interests of the territorial community in the use of propertyyou are. Nor can the exercise of their right toproperty and, more precisely, for infringing their right to dispose of their owntheir property. Therefore, the infringement alleged by the petitioners does not existof constitutional provisions.The next disputed provision - para 4 of art. 3 PCPA, determines the body, fromwhich adopts a decision for privatization of the newly formed companies withstate or municipal participation. Its challenge is based on the understanding thatthe adoption of such decisions shall be entrusted to the Privatization Agency and tothe newly formed companies with municipal participation. This understanding does not correspond toits contents.According to Article 3, paragraph 4 of the PCPA, a decision for privatization of newly formedcompanies is accepted by the Privatization Agency only for those of them who are withstate participation. For the rest or for the newly formed companies with municipalparticipation, the decision for privatization is taken by the municipal councils. In thatnamely, in determining the authority taking the decision onprivatization, this provision does not deviate from the legislativeresolution of the same issue for the other objects of privatization, which are municipal
Page 3
3property. As with para 2 and 3, so with para 4 of art. 3 of the PCPA of the municipal councils, and notthe Privatization Agency is assigned to adopt a decision on privatizationof companies with municipal participation.In the light of the foregoing, it cannot be held that the contested provision incontradiction with art. 17, para 1 and 3 of the Constitution instead of protecting harmsthe inviolability of the private property of the municipalities and does not provide themopportunity to manage and use their property according to the requirements of140 of the Basic Law - in the interest of the territorial community.Under Article 6, paragraph 4 of the PCPAThe request maintains that Article 6, paragraph 4 of the PCPA presupposes the possibility ofchange in the practice of law enforcement, and this is unacceptable ”in the conditionsof a state governed by the rule of law ”and in violation of Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, there may be forconsequence of “favoring some buyers” by putting them inprivileged position over others ”.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria.According to the other interested parties who submitted written submissionsopinions, the request is unfounded, but could, as pointed out by the Ministerof justice, ”to consider this provision being worded more preciselyand more complete. "The Constitutional Court finds the request unfounded in this part as well.The disputed para 4 of art. 6 of the PCPA states that “The privatization bodiesannounce the reasons for changing their practice ”. It follows from its contents,that it does not introduce an explicit permission to change the practice, but only presupposesopportunity for change to occur. This possibility does not contradictthe basic principles under Art. 4, para 1 and Art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, according to whichour country is a state governed by the rule of law and in it the law creates and guarantees to allcitizens and legal entities equal legal conditions for economic activity.The regulation of the privatization activity is contained inthe law, part of the provisions of which are disputed by the request in the case.The application of this regulation by the bodies under artprivatization is inevitably accompanied by the approval of a certainpractice. A change in practice is possible. Its occurrence may be due tovarious reasons - for example, a mandatory interpretation of certainprovisions or of the incorrect application of some of the provisions ofthe privatization body itself. Whatever the specific reasonshowever, change can only be driven by the need to achieve itfull correspondence between the actual meaning and content of the respectivelegal norm, on the one hand, and its practical application, on the other.Therefore, such a change is not inherently a violation or amendment of the lawand its introduction does not depend on the existence of explicit legislationpermission. At the same time, its adoption does not mean that the functioning ofprivatization bodies is not bound and subject to the law, and that throughit may lead to a difference in the legal conditions for the operation ofbusiness entities.Assuming the possibility of a change in the practice ofthe bodies carrying out the privatization, the disputed provision obliges them toannounce the reasons for this. The obligation to disclose these groundsundoubtedly requires their explicit indication and justification. Hisimplementation prevents the acceptance by the bodies under Article 4 of the PCPA of arbitrary,unmotivated and contrary to the law change in the practice of implementation
Page 4
4of privatization. In addition, the fulfillment of the same obligation ensuresconditions for acquaintance with the existing practice by the interested parties.That is why its introduction not only does not violate the basic principles under Art. 4, para 1 andArt. 19, para 2 of the Constitution, but also creates a guarantee for conductingprivatization processes in accordance with the law.Under Art. 16, para 1, item 5 of the PCPAWith the request, the provision is challenged in the part providing “authorityof the Supervisory Board to rule on the legality of the privatizationtransactions ”. It is argued that the provision of that power is contrary to119 and art. 120 of the Constitution, by which “the right to pronounce underlegality is granted only to the courts ”.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria, the opinion of which states that in addition to Article 119 and Article 120 ofThe constitutional provision also contradicts the principle of separation of powersunder Article 8 of the Basic Law.According to the other interested parties, the request isunreasonable. The considerations set out in support of this conclusion are in the sense thatwhat is provided by Art. 16, para 1, item 5 of the PCPA is not the administration of justiceunder Art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution, and is an administrative control forlegality, the exercise of which does not obstruct the path of judicial review under120, para 1 of the Constitution.The Constitutional Court also considers the request unfounded in this part.Article 16 of the PCPA lists the powers of the Supervisory Board, whichaccording to art. 12, para 4 PCPA is a management body of the Privatization Agency.One of these powers is the approval of the privatization deals that areconcluded through a publicly announced competition or public auction and their valueexceeds the amount set out in the Agency 's Rules of Procedure forprivatization (one million levs according to art. 15, item 5 of the same regulations).The approval covers the legality of such transactions and their compliancewith the strategies approved by the National Assembly under Article 3, paragraph 7 of the PCPA. As it isnotes that the power of approval is subject to constitutional reviewof transactions regarding their legality. The exercise of this poweris not the administration of justice under Article 119, paragraph 1 and Article 120, paragraph 1 ofThe Constitution.The publicly announced competition and the public auction are part of the methods forcarrying out privatization. They are the normatively established ways totransfer of shares and separate parts of the property to the commercial onescompanies, as well as at the sites under Art. 1, para 2, item 3 of the PCPA. Except for theseproperty and sites the same methods according to art. 32, para 1 of PCPA can findapplication in case of transfer of shares.The legal framework of the publicly announced competition and the public auction asways to transfer ownership in privatization include a requirementarising from the stated authority of the Supervisory Board - for approvalon the legality of transactions above a certain value. Forthere is no constitutional obstacle to the provision of such a requirement.Conversely - insofar as it is an element of the actual composition of the transaction, the introductionit has constitutional support in para 4 of art. According to her, it is determined by lawthe regime of the objects of the state and municipal property. In viewthe content of the property right the determination of such a regime exceptthe acquisition and use undoubtedly includes the disposition.
Page 5
5Assigned to the Supervisory Board as the managing authority of the Agency forprivatization, which is explicitly authorized to control its activity (Art. 16,para 1, item 1 of the PCPA), the fulfillment of the indicated requirement ensures the exerciseof control within the administrative structure itself. Given atthe exercise of this control function approval, the presence of which with16, para 2 of the PCPA is equated and the failure to pronounce on a transaction within a certain term, noresolves a legal dispute on the legality of an administrative act and does not excludejudicial review of such an act. Therefore, it does not constitute justice. Herewhy it cannot be considered that in contradiction with art. 119, para 1 and art. 120, para 1 ofThe constitution is provided to another body instead of the courtsthe administration of justice.Under Art. 11 and § 22 of the transitional and final provisions of the PCPAThese provisions are contested only in the light of what they containbinding with a term of validity of some of the non-monetary means of payment, pwhich is eligible to make payment in the privatization of commercialcompanies with state participation in the capital, included in the adopted by the Ministerboard list. It is maintained that there is a contradiction with Art. 17, para 5 and Art. 19, para. 2 ofThe Constitution, because the provision of such a term violates the principle ofequality of economic entities and “unconstitutionally encroaches onprivate property from the patrimony of individuals ”.The request is supported by the National Association of Municipalities inBulgaria.According to the other interested parties who submitted written submissionsopinions, the request is unfounded.The Constitutional Court, in order to rule on the request in this part, tookWhereas:The validity period is set only for investment vouchers issuedunder Art. 44, para 1 of the repealed Law for transformation and privatization of state andmunicipal enterprises (LPPDOP). This period is provided for in § 22 of the transitional andthe final provisions of the PCPA. The provision providing for the time limit, norefers explicitly to Article 11 of the PCPA. There is a connection between them insofar as with11 of the PCPA, the Council of Ministers is assigned the adoption and promulgation ofa list of those state - owned commercial companies, atthe privatization of which is allowed to be paid with non-monetary means of payment,such as the indicated investment vouchers.In addition to the investment vouchers issued under Article 44, paragraph 1 of the LPPDOP (revoked),non-monetary means of payment, which allow payment under privatizationtransactions for companies under Article 11 of the PCPA, are also the others provided by law and for examplelisted in § 2 of the additional provisions of the PCPA compensation vouchers,compensation bills, housing compensation bills, government long-termbonds issued on the domestic and foreign debt of the country. Normativethe established grounds for issuing each category of non-monetary paymentsfunds is different. This may lead to a difference in the legal framework of theirsregime regarding the circle of entities that can acquire them, the terms and conditionsfor disposal, as well as setting a deadline for their validity,when, as in the present case, it has lapsed due to legislative changesthe legal basis for the issuance, acquisition, use andthe disposal of one of these categories of non-monetary means of payment.The difference is due to the unequal grounds for issuing the individualtypes of non-monetary means of payment does not mean the creation of inequalitybetween their owners. In addition, setting a deadline for validity does not
Page 6
6deprives of opportunity those who have acquired investment vouchers, but are nottransferred them under the effect of Articles 44 - 52 of the LPPDOP (revoked), to be ordered bythem. The stipulated term, along with the stipulated conditions for payment with these vouchersin the privatization of commercial companies under Article 11 of the PCPA, providestheir use and allows their owners to take action if they wishnecessary in this regard. Therefore, it cannot be considered that by introducingthe specified period of validity compulsorily and without prior and faircompensation, the rights to such non-monetary means of payment are expropriated.Therefore, the disputed provisions are not in contradiction with Art. 17, para 5 and Art. 19,para 2 of the Constitution and the request is unfounded in this part as well.Taking the view that the request is unfounded,The Constitutional Court considers that it should be rejected. Therefore, on the grounds149, para 1, item 2 of the ConstitutionHAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:Rejects the request of 48 MPs from XXXIX Narodnoassembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the following provisions ofLaw on Privatization and Post - Privatization Control (SG, issue 28 of March 19, 2002)d.): art. 3, para 2 and 4, art. 6, para 4, art. 11, art. 16, para 1, item 5 in the part as far as the words “concerningtheir legality ”and § 22 of the transitional and final provisions