Special opinion of Judge Zhivan Belchev

Subscribe decision with particular opinion into account the following considerations :

1. The provision of Article 33, Paragraph 5 of the Law on taxation income of natural persons (PIT) contrary to Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution , as such taxes are determined only according to the income and assets of individuals and not and with the introduction of “ sq . m. gross area of the respective site ” as measure of income .

The law lacks a definition of the term “ sq . m. gross area of the respective site ”.

Even and to be accepted , that is not a component of property tax , the term " gross area " on which to carry out activities under Article 31 and Article 32 PIT, is used to measure a volume of relevant activities . And then as is used as a measure of the volume of relevant activities , then this concept serves as one of the indicators in determining a direct income tax , as is the patent tax .

The gross area of the corresponding object is not able to be connected in any way with the income of individuals , which should not be taxed on income of individuals.

Obviously in this case the norm of art. 33, para 5 of the Income Tax Act does not correspond to the constitutional principles for legality of the tax obligations , referred to in art. 60, para 1 and 2 and art. 84, item 3 of the Constitution .

2. The provision of art. 33, para 5 of the Income Tax Act does not correspond to the constitutional principle for equal legal conditions for economic activity of the natural and legal persons , enshrined in art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution .

The tax levy is one of the conditions , which provides and guarantees equal conditions for economic activity . The principle of equality before the law has been the subject of consideration in a number of decisions of the Constitutional Court .

The provision in question creates inequality between tax subjects .

In this case, the indicator “ sq . m. The gross area of the corresponding object " no would could not be attributable to the volume of expected income , as always from larger facility is expected to be received more income and vice versa . ( Example : workshop for trade , production and services for articles of precious metals , ie " Goldsmith's workshop " and workshop for carpentry or upholstery services .)

3. In the absence of a legal definition of the term “ sq . m. The gross area of the corresponding object " to create conditions for different interpretations of this concept of country of tax administrations in places , which leads , on the other hand , and to the creation of conditions for corruption .

 