Special opinion of Judge Nedelcho Beronov

I signed the decision on c.d. № 7/2002 with a special opinion, because I consider that the provision of art. 33, para 5 of the Personal Income Tax Act (PITA), promulgated, SG, issue 110 of 2001, is unconstitutional.

The provision stipulates that for the activities listed in it the annual (patent) tax is determined by adding to the amount determined by the order of art. 31 BGN 5 per sq.m of gross area of ​​the respective site.

The criterion "sq.m gross area" is inherent in property taxes, not income taxes. Although in the disputed provision it is used as a natural indicator of presumed income, the criterion “sq.m. gross area ”directly participates in determining the final amount of the income patent tax. The separate indication in Art. 60, para 1 of the Constitution of “income and property” must be understood as requiring a distinction between income and property taxes, for non-admission of elements inherent in one category of taxes in the other category of taxes (Decision № 9 of 20 June 1996 under Code of Civil Procedure № 9/96, promulgated, SG, issue 58 of 1996). The disputed Article 35, paragraph 5 of the Income Tax Act is not in compliance with Article 60, paragraph 1 of the Constitution.

Gross area is not always equally related to the income of service providers. For example, in order to realize the same income, different professions need a technologically different area. Watch services (Art. 31, item 7, letter “k”), trade and services for articles of precious metals (Art. 31, item 7, letter “c”) need a smaller area compared to carpentry (Art. 31, item 7, letter “a”), upholstery (Art. 31, item 7, letter “l”) and car repair services (Art. 31, item 7, letter “m” of the Income Tax Act). In order to realize an equal income, the persons who perform carpentry, upholstery and car repair services necessarily use a larger area, due to which they will pay a higher patent tax compared to the performers of watchmaking services and those for precious metal products. The practically performing services under Art. 31, item 7, letters “a”, “c”, “k” and “m” of the Income Tax Act are placed in unequal conditions. This violates the provision of Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, which requires the law to create and guarantee to all citizens equal legal conditions for economic activity. Taxation is one of these legal conditions, as stated in Decision № 6 of 19.03.1998 under c.d. № 4/98, promulgated, SG No. 35/1998

 