JUDGMENT № 9 Sofia, 24 October 2002 constitutional case № 15/2002 Judge-Rapporteur Penka Tomcheva (Promulgated, SG No. 102 of 1 November 2002)  




Members: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva - Rapporteur

In accordance with Art. 150, para 1 and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria by the Supreme Court of Cassation (SCC), the General Assembly of the Civil Collegium was requested to declare the Constitutional Court unconstitutional. Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for international commercial arbitration (AMLTA), promulgated in SG, issue 46/2002

The request disputes § 1 of the Law on the Protection of Copyright and Related Rights and § 3, paragraph 1 of the transitional provision of the law. Given the conditionality of the other provisions of § 2 and § 3, para 2 of the disputed § 1 and § 3, para 1, it is requested to declare the entire law unconstitutional.

According to the petitioners, § 1, which amended Article 47 of the International Commercial Arbitration Act (IBAA), promulgated, SG, issue 60/88, amended, issue 93/93, issue 59/98, no. 38/2001, is unconstitutional. The assignment of the SCC functions to a single instance on a claim for annulment of an arbitral award on the above 6 grounds violates "the instance of the process and the related guarantees for the right to protection of citizens and legal entities - Article 56 in connection with Article 122, para 1 of the Constitution ”. Considerations are also set forth for contradiction with Art. 119, para 1 and Art. 124 of the Constitution, which define the Supreme Court of Cassation only as a court of review. It is alleged that after the amendment the Supreme Court of Cassation "could not ensure the unity of its own practice as a guarantee of security and predictability in law enforcement, which refers to Article 124 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria."

§ 3, para 1 of the transitional provision by law prescribes to a judicial body to revoke its determinations for admission of collateral on claims under art. 47 of the LTA. This violates the constitutional principles and norms for the separation of powers (Art. 8), for the independence of the judiciary (Art. 117, para. 2) and for the right to defense (Art. 56 and Art. 122, para. 1). .

By order of 12.09.2002 request was granted substantive examination and are constituted as stakeholders National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, Minister of Justice, Court of Arbitration at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce, Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and the Supreme Bar Council . They submitted written observations, which are discussed separately in the following statement.

І. Preliminary remarks

The Law on International Commercial Arbitration, adopted in 1988 (promulgated, SG No. 60/88) in the part for annulment of an arbitral award (Articles 47, 48 et seq.), Has been amended in the following directions: 47, para 1 of the LTA of 1988 provides for the possibility of annulment of an arbitral award “by the Sofia City Court by way of a claim” in the presence of any of five grounds, and paragraph 2 of the same provision entitles the court on its own initiative to declare the decision null and void when, during the examination of the case, it finds that the subject matter of the dispute is not subject to arbitration or that the decision contradicts the public order of the People's Republic of Bulgaria. Article 48 of the law provides for a three-month term for filing the claim and excludes the possibility for review by the order of supervision in accordance with the then existing procedural regulations. In 2001, paragraph 2 was repealed and its content was included as the sixth ground for annulment. If the parties do not request revocation within the three-month period, the arbitral award shall enter into force.

With the disputed amendment of Art. 47 of the LTA, another procedural form for judicial control over arbitral awards has been adopted - revocation by the Supreme Court of Cassation, as the three-month term under Art. Paragraphs 2 and 3 provide for the suspension of the execution of the arbitral award as a precautionary measure to be allowed only by the Supreme Court of Cassation against presentation of security in the amount of the interest from the annulment of the arbitral award (para 2) and state fee determined in accordance with Article 54 and Article 55 of the Civil Procedure Code. From Article 49 of the LTA, which is not disputed, it is understood that if the state court with an effective decision overturns the arbitral award on any of the grounds under Article 47, items 1, 2 or 3, the interested party may file a claim in the dispute. before the competent state court, and when the arbitral award is revoked on any of the grounds under Article 47, items 4, 5 or 6, the state court shall return the case to the arbitral tribunal for a new hearing.

On the basis of these preliminary remarks, in considering the request, the views of the interested parties in relation to the constitutional provisions allegedly violated, the Constitutional Court accepts the following:

ІІ. For the alleged unconstitutionality of § 1 of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

According to most of the interested parties, § 1 of the Act does not contradict constitutional provisions.

The National Assembly states that this is a specific, claim, single-instance procedure for control of an effective judicial act of a non-governmental institution, where the Supreme Court of Cassation will not consider the disputes on the merits, but will act as a control and reversal instance of the arbitral award.

The Council of Ministers maintains that the amendment brings the protection against decisions of the Arbitration Court closer to the protection against court decisions that have entered into force, insofar as the claim for annulment of an arbitration decision and the proceedings under Article 231 of the CPC are submitted to the SCC. In contrast to the alleged violation of the right to defense, he referred to Article 49 of the LTA.

The Minister of Justice, for his part, argues that the exceptions to the principled and predominant three-instance proceedings are not unconstitutional once they have been introduced to ensure procedural values ​​such as speed, procedural discipline and procedural economy.

The Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry especially emphasizes that the single instance and jurisdiction of the SCC in this category of claims is related to the legal nature of the disputes and that the grounds for annulment provided for in Article 47 do not affect elements of the parties' substantive dispute. . Similar decisions are indicated in other laws.

The Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce also considers that there is no constitutional obstacle to assigning the examination of first instance cases to the Supreme Court of Cassation, as well as the judicial consideration of cases to be carried out in less than three instances.

The opinion of the Supreme Bar Council is in the opposite sense: it follows from Article 119, paragraph 1 of the Constitution that the examination of criminal and civil cases is carried out in three instances. The amendment expands the scope of powers of the Supreme Court of Cassation beyond the limits of Article 124 of the Constitution.

The disputed § 1 of ZIDZMTA, resp. Article 47 of the LTA amended by it does not contradict constitutional provisions.

1. Parliamentary materials - report of the Committee on Legal Affairs, proposals of the members of the committee, the stenographic minutes of the plenary sittings (NA, № 253-03-23 ​​/ 23.04.2002, 39th NA, stenographic diaries, book 32, p.114 et seq., book 35, p.44 et seq.), show unanimity in accepting the amendment to art. 47 of the LTA and the related motives for rationalization, speed and stabilization of the whole arbitration process. The amendment concerns only the part concerning the court - the Supreme Court of Cassation, which is competent to rule on a request for annulment of vicious arbitral awards and accessory issues related to the changed jurisdiction . The formal constitutional requirements for discussion and adoption of the amendments have been met.

2. From the provision of art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution, listing the types of courts, which administer justice, no conclusion can be made for a constitutional requirement for obligatory three-instance proceedings in all cases (Decision № 16 / 16.06.1998). under Code of Civil Procedure / 7/98, SG, issue 71/98, Decision № 27 / 15.10.1998 under Code of Civil Procedure № 20/98, SG, issue 121/98 d.). The issues of the court instances are settled in the structural, procedural and other laws, containing procedural rules. The constitutional provision of Article 133, according to which the organization and activity of the courts are regulated by law, points to this. There can hardly be any doubt that the instance is an element related to the organization and activity of the courts. The prevailing tri-instance established by the criminal and civil procedural laws is not bound by constitutional imperatives. Therefore, there is no constitutional obstacle with another law, different from the procedural ones, to be established for some disputable legal relations different from the instance generally accepted by the PPC and CPC.

The petitioners connect the violation of Art. 119, para 1 of the Constitution with the name of the court used there, as “Supreme Court of Cassation”, and “by definition the cassation instance is a control-revocation court”. This argument is also not convincing that the assignment of the Supreme Court of Cassation to rule on the annulment of arbitral awards violates the said constitutional provision. The new content of Article 47 of the LTA, given the preserved specific grounds for revocation, relating only to arbitration proceedings, in fact assigns to the SCC along with control and revocation functions and those related to the first instance proceedings, without entering into substantive relations between the parties. This follows both from the nature of the grounds for revocation and from the undisputed Article 49 of the LTA.

3. The provision of Article 56 of the Constitution provides guarantees related to the right to protection of citizens in case of violation or threat to their rights and legitimate interests, and Article 122, paragraph 1 of the Constitution details the right to protection of citizens and legal entities, when they are necessary for reasons related to the activity of the judiciary. The constitutionally regulated by Art. 122, para 1 judicial protection of the citizens and the legal entities refers to all stages of the process.

The disputed legislative decision with the amendment of art. 47 of the LTA does not contradict the indicated constitutional provisions.

Protection against the decisions rendered in arbitration proceedings is precisely the protection before the state court under the procedure and on the specific grounds for the arbitration proceedings under Article 47 of the LTA. The fact that this protection is realized in one instance - the Supreme Court of Cassation, does not limit the right to defense. Although outside the “judiciary”, the rules for proceedings before an arbitral tribunal established by the LTA place it at the level of a kind of “stage of the process” within the meaning of Article 122, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, where the protection under Article 47 of the LTA is the next stage. From this point of view, insofar as Art. 122, para 1 in fine means that there is always more than one stage of the process, the protection within the arbitration process in its entirety is provided in two stages: before the non-state, arbitration and before the state court. . Here, too, it is not insignificant to note that in case of annulment of the arbitral award by the Supreme Court of Cassation in the proceedings under Article 47 of the LTA, the interested party has open opportunities for defense before the state court or retrial by the arbitral tribunal, depending on the grounds on which the vicious arbitration award was revoked, as follows from the undisputed Article 49 of the LTA. This provision confirms the provision of the constitutionally necessary conditions for the full realization of the right to protection of citizens and legal entities: initially before the arbitral tribunal, if necessary after it before the Supreme Court of Cassation and if the latter annuls the arbitral award under Art.

4. The Constitution in Art. 124 outlines the general and most essential task of the Supreme Court of Cassation to “exercise supreme judicial supervision for accurate and equal application of the laws by all courts”. The said obligation for the Supreme Court of Cassation cannot be delegated to another court by law precisely because it is assigned only to it by the basic law. However, it does not necessarily follow that the Supreme Court of Cassation is constitutionally prohibited from carrying out other activities assigned by law related to the administration of justice. A typical example in support of the above is Article 81, paragraph 2 of the Judiciary Act (JSA), promulgated, SG No. 59/94, amended, SG No. 74/2002, according to which the Supreme Court of Cassation resolves jurisdictional disputes when a party to them is a court of appeal.

The judicial activity assigned to the Supreme Court of Cassation with the disputed amendment to consider the claims under Art. 47 of the LTA, in which the typical control and revocation functions are preserved without being able to resolve substantive disputes on the merits (argument of Art. 49 of the LTA), does not contradict Art. .124 of the Constitution.

III. For the unconstitutionality of § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of ZIDZMTA

According to the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Justice and the Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce, the provision does not contradict the Constitution.

The Arbitration Court at the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry considers that § 3, para. city ​​court to annul the precautionary measures imposed by him.

The Supreme Bar Council has not expressed an opinion on the matter.

The disputed § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of the law contains rules for the court cases, unfinished, without final decisions, before the Sofia City Court, formed during the operation of the previous regulation. The content is as follows: “Articles 47 and 48 shall also apply to existing proceedings for annulment of arbitral awards. In these cases, the Sofia City Court shall, within two weeks of the entry into force of this law, terminate the proceedings before it, revoke the imposed precautionary measures and send the case for consideration by the Supreme Court of Cassation. ”

The provision is unconstitutional only in the part by which it orders the Sofia City Court to revoke the precautionary measures imposed by it. In violation of Art. 8 of the Constitution for Separation of Powers and Art. 117, para. 2 of the Constitution for the Independence of the Judiciary, the legislature itself predestines the fate of judicial acts by which appropriate precautionary measures have been imposed and , ordered the independent body of the judiciary, in this case the Sofia City Court to revoke the precautionary measures. The court is deprived of its inherent function to decide because, apart from annulling it, the legislature has not given it any other option.

With the indicated part of the provision of § 3, para 1 PR of ZIDZMTA the right to protection of the citizens under art. 56, and of them, and of the legal entities under art. 122, para 1 of the Constitution is unconstitutionally violated. In the period after the repeal of the precautionary measures ordered by law by the Sofia City Court until the enactment of new ones by the Supreme Court of Cassation, the property interests of the interested parties are deprived of the protection of the collateral.

In the remaining part § 3, para 1 of the PR of ZIDZMTA, for which considerations for unconstitutionality are not presented by the petitioners, duly regulates how to deal with the pending cases on which no effective decision has been rendered.

The unconstitutional part of § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of the law does not change the meaning of the remaining part, resp. the meaning of the entire contested law, in which case it should continue to operate.

For the stated reasons the Constitutional Court on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria

RESOLVED:

Declares unconstitutional § 3, para 1 of the transitional provision of the Law for amendment and supplement of the Law for international commercial arbitration, promulgated, SG, issue 46/2002, in the part with the following content: “cancels the imposed precautionary measures” .

Dismisses in the remainder the request of the Supreme Court of Cassation, General Assembly of the Civil Collegium to declare unconstitutional the entire Law on Amendments to the Law on International Commercial Arbitration.

