OPINION

of the Bulgarian Lawyers for Human Rights Foundation
on constitutional case He 1/2001

The Constitutional Court has admitted for consideration on the merits the request of
composition of the 3rd Department of the Supreme Administrative Court for establishing the unconstitutionality,
as well as the non-compliance with Art. | of the Additional Protocol to the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), of 5 6 of
The transitional and final provisions of the State Property Act,
which reads:

“For what has been established in accordance with the established procedure until the entry into force of the law indefinitely
or for more than 10 years of right of use the term under Art. 56, para. 1
from the date of its establishment. When the period has expired on the date of
entry into force of the law, the property is transferred within six months of the same
date. ”

1. On the compliance of 6 bot TFP of the LSA with the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria

We fully support those set out in the request of the Third Department of
Supreme Administrative Court considerations in which are detailed
the grounds for declaring the unconstitutionality of the said provision
due to contradiction with art. 17, para. 3 ial. Article 5 19 of the Constitution.

In addition, we would like to draw your attention to the following
arguments in support of this opinion:

1. The reasons for the draft LSA do not set out any considerations for
the inclusion in the law of the disputed provision by which the existing ones are rearranged
cases of a right of use established before its entry into force. Even if we accept
the assumption of the applicants that the purpose of the legislator was with this norm to
correct a possible> unacceptable> benefit caused by
irresponsible disposal of state property, the law affects too broad
circle of public relations. Under the old legislation the law
of use is established both for a fee and free of charge. In the first case
it cannot be presumed that it is an irresponsible order, because it is
price paid at tariffs set by the state administration for assessment of
the properties and the real rights over them. In the latter case, it must be borne in mind that
that this provision mainly concerns cases of gratuitous assignment of a right to
use on desolate lands. As a result of the perfectly concluded contracts with
the state users have ennobled lands without value or with minimal
such and have turned them into valuable properties. As a result of this provision they
they lose their duly established real rights without it being provided for
their compensation for the damages and lost profits actually suffered by them.

2. As stated in the request made, with 6 6 of the TFP of the VAT Act de facto
expropriate existing real rights over state-owned property.
The question of the constitutionality of such expropriation is also raised in
connection with art. 33 of the LSA, according to which “the state may perform
forced expropriation of property - private property, only to satisfy
such state needs, as a result of which the expropriated property becomes public

state property." This text further develops the guarantee of Art. 17, para. 5 from
Its constitution should also apply in the present case, which is of limited concern
Property Law. It is difficult to assume that in any case
the right of use over state property ceded until the entry into force of the law,
which is now expropriated according to 6 6, will satisfy such state needs, c
as a result of which the property will become public state property.

3. Paragraph 6 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Law on
state property also reflects on established before the adoption of this
law superficies on state land. According to the repealed Art. 15, para. 3 of the Act
for ownership, the right to build on state land or state or
municipal plot includes the use of the undeveloped part of the land by
the superficial owner. This is a special provision that excludes
the application of the general rule provided in Art. 64 of the Insurance Act, restrictive
the superintendent 's right to land only to the extent necessary for
use of the building according to its purpose. That is, the limited real property
the right to use the undeveloped part of the property is included in the superficies
right to state land. After the repeal of Art. 15, para. 3 ZS and in the absence of
a similar norm in the Law on State Property, the regime of superficial ownership of state
land is equated with that on land owned legally or physically
faces.

This raises the question of the powers of the superintendent who acquired the right
of ownership On a building or building right on state land before
adoption of the LSA. Insofar as the right to build in these cases includes something else
limited real right - the right to use the undeveloped part of the land,
it could be assumed that in this case too 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA applies. IN
in cases where the right to build is established indefinitely, it is established indefinitely
and the right of use over the undeveloped part of the property and therefore the term of
the right of use will have to be reduced under the rules of 86 in connection with Art.
56 ZDS. This significantly restricts the rights of the superficies
owner, who also acquired the right to use state property, since
the latter right shall be revoked after the expiration of the period specified in Art. 56 of the LSA term.

4. Undoubtedly, the concept of "private property" includes a wide range
property rights of a person. In this case, the encroachment on acquired
property rights and in particular limited property rights should
be complied with the provisions of Art. 17 of the Constitution.

In the request for declaring unconstitutionality on 8 6 are set out
considerations for the fact that none of the requirements of Art. 17, para. 5 from
The Constitution - with the entry into force of 6 6 an indefinite circle of persons are deprived of
property rights, by virtue of the law itself, and not by individual acts, which it does not
makes it possible to establish on a case-by-case basis the existence of a state
or a municipal need and the impossibility of satisfying that need in another way,
as well as to provide advance and equivalent compensation.

The Constitution provides for “forced expropriation ... on the basis of
law". This should be understood in the sense that by law they must be regulated as
the preconditions for and the consequences of deprivation of property and is assumed
stable and understandable, accessible and sufficiently secure, predictable
legislation. In the absence of such legislation,
the administration to act arbitrarily in case of confiscation of property.

5. With the adoption of 6 6 the state, using its legislative power,
encroaches on acquired property rights of other persons and at the same time
benefits yourself. Thus the state as a business entity
rearranges existing contractual relations in its favor, not only deprives.
the persons affected by the legally acquired real right of use, but also in a number
cases makes it impossible or at least incredibly difficult to undertake
them business initiatives. This, for the reasons set out in detail in the request,
contradicts the provision of art. 19 of the Constitution and the principle of
the rule of law.

The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria has had cases to point out that
encroachment on an undertaking constitutes, in a broad sense, encroachment on
the right to property guaranteed by Art. 17 of the Constitution, and that
unpredictability in the field of private law relations is incompatible with
market economy and the protection of free enterprise; and
investments (thus decision He 1/1996 under const. e, He 29/95 and decision He 3/2000 under
const. d. He 3/2000).

At the same time, this raises the issue of compensation for those affected
not only for the deprivation of their real right, but also for all actually suffered as a result
of its revocation damages and losses. The LSA itself does not provide for compensation of
the persons affected by the measure provided for in 6 6 of its TFP. Really, that's it
principle does not exclude the possibility that they may seek redress in the general order.
However, the State's liability for damages caused by the measure is excluded
under Bulgarian law due to the fact that a prerequisite for implementation
her, both on a contractual and tort basis, is that the damages occurred in
result of illegal action. The provision of this measure by law
excludes the illegality of its application J.

Only in cases of relinquished right of use
those affected could seek sums under Art. 55 of the CPA, as part
of the price corresponding to the remainder of the agreed term would be paid to
the ground has disappeared. However, even if such a claim were to be respected, it is
the award would not constitute compensation, but simply the return of part of
the contract price.

Those affected could also seek payment for work done on the property
improvements. In normal civil relations in this regard, they would
had the opportunity to exercise the right of retention until the payment of the debts
their amounts. In this case, however, 6 6 of the TFP of the Law on State Property turns the properties into holdings without
grounds state property, which are seized by the order of art. 80 ZDS by order of

the district governor. Its appeal in principle does not suspend the execution, and in
presence of the formal preconditions for application of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA and for
its issuance, there would be no reason to claim its illegality, ie.
there would be no ground for its appeal and for a possible suspension of
its execution by the court. This is another inadmissible and unconstitutional
privilege and benefit of the state as a pure country

civil law relations.

All these circumstances, indicating extremely serious in scope and
depth affecting a wide range of legally acquired rights, make it even more
unacceptable in principle inadmissible rearrangement with retroactive effect of
substantive relations, which contradicts the provisions of Our law
principle of operation of the substantive law from now on and of the constitutional ones
guarantees of ownership, business initiative and the rule of law.

P. On the compliance of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA with Art. 1 of the Supplementary

Protocol (Protocol Xe) to the European Convention on Human Rights and

fundamental freedoms

1. The term "property" within the meaning of Art. | of the Ho Protocol

In the Bulgarian text of Protocol He published in the State Gazette s
The term "property" is translated as used in the original texts of
English and French words “rovez510p5” !, respectively “U1epz” ?, which have more
broad meaning (especially the French term, as the European Court of Human Rights)
the person has noted in interpreting the provision).

In its constant practice on the application of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1
The European Court has ruled that "property" is not only property rights, but also
a number of other acquired and sufficiently defined property rights,
constituting generally "valuable assets". He found that the guarantee of the text.
covers property collateral (the case of Gazus Dozir - und Förderteknik OOD against
The Netherlands3); receivables that the interested party may claim to have at least
"legitimate expectation" to materialize (eg Pressure company Naviera AD and
etc. v. Belgium ’), economic interests related to the functioning of
enterprises, respectively the licenses, constituting essential conditions for the business.
and associated with a long - standing expectation of the right to exercise (Tre Traktorer
Akciebulag v. Sweden, Fredin v. Sweden); the so-called "Woofu 1" - clientele,
fame, reputation and business standing (Van Marle et al. v. the Netherlands ”).

Therefore, the European Court of Human Rights has taken it widely
interpretation of the concept of property, as perceived by the Constitutional Court
of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Undoubtedly, the limited real rights over real estate as standing
as close as possible to the right of ownership fall into the category of rights
protected by Art. | of Protocol Xie 1. It is also undisputed that the present case concerns.
existing, already acquired property rights - 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA affects.
right of use, duly established before the entry into force of this law.

Similar to Art. 19 of the Bulgarian Constitution, the European Convention
protects the constituents of "property" within the meaning of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1,
economic interests related to enterprises for the operation of which
the established right of use on state property in a large number of cases has occurred
essential condition. Withdrawal before the term in which the holders are legally
relying on them to exercise it undisturbed, he seriously encroached on theirs as well
business in general. The European Court has ruled in several cases that deprivation of
basic conditions for doing business, which has unfavorable
consequences for good standing and its value, constitutes intervention in
exercise of the right guaranteed by that provision, such as the withdrawal of
a license to sell alcohol to the applicant 's restaurant business under
the case of Tre Traktorer Akciebulag: “The court finds that economic interests,
related to the operation of the restaurant! "Cardinal" are "owned" by
the meaning of Art. 1 of the Lo! Protocol. It has already been accepted that the license is valid
one of the main conditions for the implementation of the company's business -
applicant and its withdrawal has adverse consequences for the good
location and value of the restaurant. Thus the withdrawal
represents in the circumstances of the case interference in the exercise of

n.

the right of the TTA to "use its property peacefully".

Therefore, there can be no dispute that with 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA is implemented
state intervention in the exercise of what is guaranteed by Art. | from
Protocol Ho! right.

2. Which of the three rules of art. | of the Ho Protocol is applicable in the case

In its judgment in Sporung and Lönnrot v. Sweden8, the Court
accepts:

"This text contains three separate rules. The first thing that has in common
nature, proclaims the principle of peaceful use of property - that is
enshrined in the first sentence of the first subparagraph. The second concerns
"Deprivation of property" and subject it to certain conditions - that is
enshrined in the second sentence of the same paragraph. The third gives to the states
the right, inter alia, to control the use of property in
in accordance with the general interest by adopting such laws as they deem appropriate
necessary for that purpose - it is contained in the second subparagraph. "

In their judgment in James and Others v. The United Kingdom?
he clarifies:

"The three rules contained in Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 are not
"separate" in the sense of a lack of connection between them. The second and third rules
concern special cases of interference in the exercise of the right to the undisturbed
use of the property and should therefore be considered in
in the light of the general principle set out in the first rule. "

From this interpretation of the provision given in the cited founders
judgments, the European Court has been adamant to this day.

The criterion which the European Court applies in assessing whether it concerns
"deprivation of property" within the meaning of the second rule is the extent to which it is
completed, final and irrevocable revocation of the title and repayment
of law.

In the present case, a right of use terminated by virtue of 6 6 of
TFP of the VAT Act before the expiration of the term for which it was assigned, there is a withdrawal
of a valid established right, which, in our opinion, constitutes deprivation of
"property" within the meaning of the second rule of Art. | of Protocol He 1. Without being
carries out expropriation in accordance with the procedure provided by law, providing
the guarantee of art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution, is achieved through legislation
the same effect - the real right of use is taken away from the holder and passes
back on the naked owner, final and irrevocable.

The situation in the case of the Holy Monasteries against Greece is dire !.
The Greek state has established a rebuttable legal presumption of statehood
ownership of monastic lands and forests for which monasteries cannot
prove their right to property. Before the European Court, the government argued
that it is merely a procedural rule relating to the burden of proof.
The court notes, however, that at the same time the monasteries were deprived of
opportunity to prove their ownership in all general ways provided by
Greek law, for example by establishing an acquisition by prescription. In the condition of,
that can be explained property titles dating back to the time of the Byzantine and
The Ottoman empires were lost or destroyed, and much later
establishing a system of property registration, the Court held that it was a question of
a substantive provision that results in a transfer of ownership
on the state. He finds that there has been a deprivation of property within the meaning of
the second rule of art. | of Protocol Xe 1.

3. Conditions under which deprivation of property may be justified by
in terms of Art. | of Protocol Xe

The European Court of Human Rights has repeatedly emphasized in

its practice that deprivation of possessions is the most drastic intervention in
exercising the guaranteed by art. | of Protocol Xe 1 right to undisturbed
use of property. Such interference does not infringe this right only if they are
the following three cumulative conditions are met: 1) to be taken "in the interest of
society "; 2) be proportionate to the aim pursued and 3) be lawful
("in accordance with the conditions laid down by law and in the general principles of
international law ").

The first and third conditions are expressly provided for in the rule on
deprivation of property, and the second stems from the requirement that this rule be
interpreted in the light of the general rule in the first sentence of para. | of Art. | from
Protocol He! for undisturbed use of the property, as well as by
the principle of a fair balance implemented throughout the Convention, which should
achieved between the interests of society and the rights of the individual.
"The demand for such a balance is inherent in the Convention as a whole and is also reflected in
the structure of art. 1 of Protocol L01. "(Sorung and
Lenroth).

Moreover, even in cases where the Court finds that there is no revocation
ownership and examines the measures taken in terms of the rule,
contained in the second subparagraph or of the general rule laid down in the first
sentence of art. | of Protocol Ho1, he proceeds from the same in his assessment
conditions for the admissibility of interference in the exercise of the right to
undisturbed use of possessions and especially by the requirement for
a fair balance between the interests involved.

4. "In the interest of society"

The European Court of Justice has held that the State enjoys a wide freedom to
assesses what is in the public interest and what measures should be taken
taken to protect this interest. However, this freedom cannot lead to
abuse of power or overt arbitrariness.

In his judgment in James et al., He noted:
of course, the discretion which the legislature has in
implementation of social and economic policy to be broad, the Court will
took into account the conclusion of the legislature on what is “in the interest of
society ”, unless this conclusion is clearly unreasonable
reason. ”

As mentioned above, the reasons for the bill on the state
property do not contain a justification of the measure regulated in 8 6 of the TFP. Can be
suggested that it was undertaken in pursuit of the aim of protecting the state
property, which according to Art. 18, para. 6 of the Constitution is managed and
governs in the interests of citizens and society.

At the same time, this measure is essentially unilateral
cancellation by the State of one of its contractual obligations under Article

its capacity as a party to a civil legal relationship. The European Court is
accepted in some cases that the state could intervene by law and
to rearrange conditions under existing contractual relations between private parties
persons, as well as to amend or even terminate its contractual relationship with
such persons!?. However, such interference is not permissible in respect of any
clauses of the contract, and can be done only under certain conditions -
damages and procedural guarantees which the Court considers in the context of
the requirement For a fair balance between the public interest and those concerned
individual rights (see point B below).

In the case of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA it concerns the unilateral termination of
contractual relationship to which the state itself is a party, by legislative means - with
the means of power, without any procedural guarantees for those concerned
individual rights and without compensation. Therefore, apart from the requirement for
fair balance, such a move could be seen as an abuse of
power.

At the same time, the Constitution and the LDA connect the public interest mainly with
the right to public state property - the objects of such property
at all can not be encumbered with real rights, forced expropriation of
private property is permissible only if the property will become public state
property, etc. However, the discussed provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA is not
restricts public state property to the sites. Especially when it comes to
for a retroactive measure, it is unacceptable from the point of view of the public interest
to extend to all objects of state property - public and
private.

It is inadmissible for a law adopted in implementation of the established by
Constitution democratic principles, including the abolition of
the existing privileges for state property, to put
the state in a privileged position in relation to the other party - a citizen or
legal entity - when it has the quality of an equal party to
an outstanding civil law relationship has also arisen.

In a democratic society with a market economy, legal certainty and
the stability of legally established contractual relationships are also
significant public interest affected by the provision in question
inadmissible way.

In addition, this legislative measure affects a wide range of legal holders
established right of use, without any discretion in each
individual case. This poses a serious risk in a number of specific cases

circumstances to prove that the revocation infringes on individual rights, without c
actually serve the purpose pursued by 5 6, even if it is assumed that it is
in the public interest.

B. Proportionality of the measure

In all hypotheses of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1, the Court finds
whether a "fair balance" has been struck between the interests of the community and
the requirements for the protection of the fundamental rights of the individual, although here too
a wide discretion of the legislator is usually allowed.

In the case of James et al. The court held:

"The measure that takes away a person's property is not just necessary
to pursue a legitimate aim "in the public interest" in the specifics
circumstances and in general! 3, but there should also be a reasonable attitude of
proportionality between the means used and the purpose to be achieved
achieve. This requirement is expressed in other words in the Sporung judgment
and Lonroth with the notion of "fair balance" to be achieved
between the requirements of the general interest and the requirements of the protection of
basic individual rights. The required balance will not be found if
the person concerned must bear "individual and excessive burden". "

In this regard, the Court first examines whether the person concerned
receives appropriate compensation - not only in cases of deprivation of
property, but also in those to which it accepts as applicable the general rule in the first
sentence of para. 1 of Art. | (for example in the cases of Sporung and Leonrot v
United Kingdom and Erkner and Hofauer v. Austria! 4). He accepts that
“The obligation to pay compensation derives from an implicit one
condition contained in Art. |! of Protocol Mo 1, analyzed in its entirety "(Lithgow and Lithgow
etc. against the United Kingdom).

In its judgment in James and Others, the Court emphasized:

“As for Art. 1 of Protocol M1, the protection of the right of
the property he provides would be completely illusory and inefficient at
the absence of any principle of equivalence. It's obvious that
the conditions for compensation are relevant in assessing whether the disputed
legislation respects the fair balance between the various stakeholders
interests and, in particular, whether it does not impose on the applicants
disproportionately large weight.

The Court also accepted the Commission 's conclusion on the standard of
compensation: confiscation of property without payment of compensation,
reasonably consistent with its value would usually
constitutes disproportionate interference which would not be considered justified
according to art. | of Protocol M 1. However, this text does not guarantee the right of full

compensation in all circumstances. Legitimate purposes in the “interest of
society ”, such as the objectives pursued by economic reform measures or
measures aimed at achieving greater social justice can
require compensation below the full market value. "

The lack of any possibility and mechanism for compensation
the persons affected by f 6 of the TFP of the LSA, positively violates requirements
of Art. 1 of Protocol No. 1 a fair balance between the public interest and
protection of individual rights. That's reason enough to
finds that the measure contradicts this provision.

In addition, it should be borne in mind that the assessment of the existence of
The European Court of Justice makes a fair balance in each case, even
the relevant law to pursue a legitimate aim in the public interest and even
the means chosen by the legislator for its achievement to be in principle compliant with
the requirements of art. | of Protocol No. 1.

Affected by 6 6 people are burdened with one personally and excessively
burden, without any procedural possibility to establish whether in their
In a specific case, the measure actually achieves the objective pursued by law in
public interest and, even if so, whether it is proportionate to that aim, i.e. whether
the requirement of art. | of Protocol Xe fair balance.

In three cases against Greece (Katikaridis et al. 8, Tsomtsos et al
Papachelas8), the applicants> objected to> the irrefutable legal
presumption that the owners of the properties bordering the main road benefit from
its construction or improvement and should therefore be included in those made
from the state costs, receiving compensation only for part of their expropriated for
the whole earth. The European Court has found a violation of Art. 1, para. 1, assoc. 1 of
Protocol He 1. It notes that the principle of compensation has been established in everyone
one case to be reduced by an amount equal to the value of land with a width of 15 m.,
without giving the affected owners the opportunity to prove that in fact
the event in question does not benefit them, or brings them less, or even less
causes them damage to varying degrees. "This very inflexible system does not
taking into account the diversity of cases, ignoring in particular the differences,
due to the nature of the construction works and the location of
the affected properties. It is clearly devoid of reasonable grounds. Regarding
of a large number of owners, it necessarily violates the fair
balance between the protection of property rights and the requirements of
the public interest. ” (judgments in the Katikaridis and Tsomtsos cases, to which
also refers to the judgment in the Papachelas case).

The court concluded that the applicants "were forced to bear
individual and overweight that could be treated as

legitimate only if they had had the opportunity to prove the allegations
harm yourself and, if successful, receive appropriate compensation. "In all these cases
The Court did not find it necessary to assess whether the applicants really were
suffered damage. According to him, the necessary balance has objectively ceased to
exists in their very legal position.

Similarly, by virtue of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, the affected holders of
the right in rem may not rely on any specific
their specific cases circumstances, nor can they seek compensation for
the damage suffered. Therefore, they bear a personal and excessive burden,
incompatible with the requirements of a fair balance between the interests of the individual by
on the one hand and society on the other.

On the plane of a fair balance between these interests
The European Court has found violations in cases of state interference in
exercise of the guarantees of art. | ost Protocol He 1 rights carried out
by law and retroactively, leading to the repayment of already
arising under a contract or tort
the state.

Thus, in the case of Greek refineries Stran and Stratis Andreadis, there is a law
annulled arbitral award, which is final and binding
recognized debt of the State to the applicants. The European Court considers that it is
the general rule in the first sentence of Art. 1, para. 1. The Greek
government points out that the purpose of the measure was to eliminate the effects of
military regime - the claim arose from a preferential contract, damaging
national economy and helped maintain the regime. In the decision of
The European Court points out:

"The court has no doubt that it was for the democratic Greek state
necessary to terminate a contract which it considered to be prejudicial
economic interests In fact, according to the practice of
international and arbitral tribunals each state has sovereign
power to amend or even terminate a contract concluded with private individuals, as long as
to pay compensation. This simultaneously reflects “the recognition that
the supreme interests of the state take precedence over the contractual ones
obligations, and takes into account the need to maintain one
fair balance in contractual relations. However, one-sided
termination of a contract does not produce effect in respect of some
essential clauses thereof, such as the arbitration clause. "

Noting that Greek law recognizes the autonomous nature of
arbitration clauses and that the claim arose before the termination of the contract,
The court found that the legislative interference had violated the requirements
fair balance.

In the case Pressos company Naviera AD and others. complaints have been addressed
against the effects of a law by which the Belgian Parliament has restricted
the liability of the state and of private companies licensed by it for damages,

caused by negligence on the part of them or their servants in the provision of
pilotage of ships in territorial waters. It was the law
retroactive effect for a period of 30 years before the date of its entry into force
in force. He thus deprived the applicants of their claims for damages for
damage from accidents that occurred before that date. The court held that although
the claims in question have not been established with effect and are subject to
enforcement of judgments under Belgian law they arise from the moment
of the damage and, therefore, constitute an "asset" and hence a "property" under
the meaning of Art. | of Protocol He 1. The applicants had “legitimately
expectation that their claims for damages suffered as a result of
accidents before the law enters into force will be recognized accordingly
the general provisions on tort. The court finds that it is about
deprivation of property within the meaning of the second sentence of Art. 1, para. | from
Ho 1 Protocol, carried out with a legitimate aim in the public interest. He, however,
finds a violation of the requirement for proportionality of the implemented
intervention. "The economic considerations put forward by the Government, and
his desire to unify Belgian law with that of neighboring countries are
could impose existing legislation in this area,
deviating from the general provisions on tort. Such
considerations cannot justify retroactive legislation,
having as its object and effect the deprivation of the applicants of their claims
for compensation. Such substantial interference with the exercise of the rights of
the applicants is incompatible with ensuring a fair balance between
the interests involved. "The Court therefore finds a violation of Article | of
Protocol Xe 1, as regards the events preceding the entry of the law into
force.

Even in cases of control over the use of property (where
the intervention is not as drastic as in the case of confiscation), the Court has held important
significance of the circumstance whether at the occurrence of the legal relationship
the owner (right holder) was aware of the legal situation and
the prospects associated with it. So in the case of Alan Jacobson v. Sweden !?
The court did not find a violation, because when buying the property placed by the authorities
under a prolonged building ban, the applicant could not have been absent
aware of these perspectives. In addition, there were procedures giving
periodically the opportunity to compare the public interest with that of
the individual.

Early revocation of a permit for extraction of gravel by ecological
considerations which led to serious losses for the applicant was accepted as
in accordance with Art. | of Protocol Xe in the Fredin case. The court has substantiated this
conclusion that the applicants had begun to invest funds
seven years after a legislative change clearly provided for
the potential for revocation of existing permits, after
the expiration of ten years from its entry into force. The applicants were
aware of the possibility of losing their permission. Thus the decision of

the competent authorities to allow them to build service extractions
facilities contained an explicit reservation in this regard. The Court notes in
in addition, the applicants were granted a period of three years to
closing the business and that the authorities have shown some flexibility as they are
extended this period by 11 months.

The holders of the right of use, affected by 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, who are
they had every reason to expect that they would be able to do it undisturbed
exercised for the period for which it was established and could not have guessed
retroactive legislative intervention, are deprived of any such protection
of your interests. Such an encroachment is unacceptable in all cases, but it is
particularly drastic in those in which the 10-year period has expired at the time of
the entry into force of the LSA and 6 6 gives them only 6 months to take steps to
compliance with the surprise deprivation of their rights.

C. "In accordance with the conditions laid down in law and in the general principles of
international law "

(a) The principle that a measure is lawful requires that it be based on
sufficiently accessible, accurate and predictable national legal rules and
provided protection against arbitrariness, which is expressed in procedural guarantees.

The European Court of Justice does not, in principle, examine whether domestic law is
applied correctly. In this case it is a legislative measure with effect towards
all falling within the scope of 8 6 persons, therefore no question is asked about
compliance with this provision in each specific case, unless, for example
order under Art. 80 of the LSA will be issued by an improper body before the expiration of 10-
the annual term or other similar hypotheses.

The measure of early revocation of the right of use itself is provided for in
a provision meeting the requirements of accessibility, accuracy and predictability, and
there are remedies available to provide sufficient procedural guarantees in the case of
illegal application.

At the same time, however, expropriation was actually carried out without
observance of the conditions provided for in the Constitution and the LDA itself.
The persons concerned could not have foreseen a possible revocation
their established real right in violation of the clear and precise requirements of Art. 17,
al. 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

6) In the cases of James et al. and Lithgow the Court held that the reference to
the general principles of international law in Art. | means that the principles are
incorporated in the provision, but only in respect of the actions to which
these principles are usually applied, ie. the actions of the state towards foreigners
citizens.

The early termination of the right to
Undoubtedly, its use also affects persons who are not citizens of the Republic of Bulgaria. In their cases

this measure is also contrary to the Convention due to a violation of the general
principles of international law incorporated in the provision of Art. 1 of
Protocol 1.

These principles unconditionally require adequate compensation for those affected
faces. In the mentioned cases, James et al. and Lithgow the Court cited Resolution
(52) 1 of 19 March 1952. of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
approved the text of the Protocol and it is open for signature and which states that
“As regards Article 1, the general principles of international law, as
are currently understood to include the obligation to pay
compensation in the event of expropriation of persons who are not nationals of
the country concerned ”.

Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the LSA does not meet these requirements or taken
independently, nor considered in connection with the other provisions of the Bulgarian
law applicable to the consequences of its operation.

In conclusion, our view is that the provision in question ev
contradiction both with the indicated texts of the Constitution of Bulgaria,
so count. That Protocol F 1 to the ECHR. By declaring private property
for inviolability and allows its forced expropriation for state and
municipal needs only on the basis of law, provided that these needs do not
can be satisfied in another way and after in advance and equally
compensation, our Constitution provides for a stronger protection in
comparison with Art. 1 of Protocol Xe 1. However, in the absence of
possibility to compensate the affected persons and of any kind
procedure for establishing the necessary fair balance between
public and individual interest in each case, she
violates the not so strict requirements of Art. | of Protocol Xe 1.