Dissenting opinion of Judge Georgi Markov The courts are called upon to exercise control over the legality of the acts and actions of the administrative bodies - Article 120, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. In a state governed by the rule of law - Article 4, paragraph 1 of the Basic Law, judicial acts are binding on the parties to the case and enjoy the force of res judicata. In view of this, the decisions of the SAC, by which acts of the DEC and the CEC were revoked and declared null and void, are binding on these bodies and are enforceable. instead, Irena Marinova-Varadinova was registered as the leader of the NMSS coalition list, and was announced by the Supreme Administrative Court with effective court decisions. This means that these acts of the election administration did not give rise to any legal consequences. Such is the distinguishing feature of the null and void administrative acts. - Razgrad is registered Ventseslav Dimitrov. Therefore, it was he who should have been entered in the ballot of this coalition, not Irena Marinova - Varadinova. Article 74, paragraph 2 of the Law on Public Procurement was violated, according to which the identity of the names and the order of the persons in the candidate list It should be borne in mind that the election administration has also violated Decision № 10/97 under c.d. № 14/97 of the Constitutional Court. This decision, which is binding on all authorities in the country, assumes that the quality of a person as an associate of the State Security should be determined only in connection with the existence of indisputable evidence of deliberate delivery of information. The reference file is not in itself such evidence, because not only the current associates were registered and registered, but also persons prepared for recruitment, as well as persons whose recruitment did not take place (Art. 50 of the Instruction for the operational report of DS - I - 20 / 20.01.78). That is why Ventseslav Dimitrov cannot be considered an associate of the State Security and there is no legal basis for his withdrawal as a leader from the list by the NMSS coalition, as it does not appear in the report under Article 6, paragraph 2, items 1, 5. and 7 of the VAT Act, as required by Article 48, paragraph 5 of the Law on Public Procurement.