"OPINION

OF “INTERNATIONAL COMPANY CENTER
MANAGEMENT ”AD-SOFIA

PO K. D. X1 / 2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of 13 February 2001, ruled under c.d. Ho
1/2001, the requests were admitted for consideration on the merits,
made by a staff of the W Department of the Supreme Administrative
court (SAC) under the conditions of art. 150, para 2 of the Constitution, for: a)
establishing the unconstitutionality of 6 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act
(1PZRZDS) and 6) to establish non-compliance with the same
provision with the provision of Art of the Additional Protocol to the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

With the specified definition “International Center for
Company Management ”AD has been constituted as an interested party
party to the case and is giving the opportunity to submit in writing
position.

Taking this opportunity, “please consider and
consider the following opinion:

The Constitutional Court was seised under the conditions of Art. 150, para 2,
of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The issue of non-compliance of 6 6 MANPADS with
Constitution and the First Additional Protocol to the European
Convention on Human Rights has been submitted to the Constitutional Court by
composition of the Third Division of the Supreme Administrative Court in
connection with the proceedings in administrative case Ho 4918/2000

party, was formed on a complaint filed by the “International Center
under company management ”AD, against order He RD-15-176 / 8.06.
2000 of the District Governor of Sofia District for the seizure of
Bistritsa training base. As a basis for the order it is stated that
by virtue of 6 6 of the RZDPZ the term of the right of use has expired,
established by contract of 6 April 1990. Under that contract
the right of use has been ceded for a period of 50 years, as
the company has paid its price in the amount of the value of
the base (BGN 6,078,000 as of the date of concluding the contract).

As in the appeal to the Supreme Administrative Court
pointed out, we consider that the provision of 6 6 IZRZDS contradicts
Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution. By supporting the others
grounds for unconstitutionality, as well as for non-compliance with
an international agreement to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party,
developed in the act by which the Constitutional Court was seised, this
reason is most related to
unconstitutional ' consequences of “the action of
provisions which directly affect constitutionally established and
guaranteed rights of the company. “(Evidence 9 for
the circumstances of the present case set out herein
opinion are contained in the attached adm. case He 4918/2000)

As a property right of property law, the right of
use unconditionally enjoys the constitutional protection of
property rights. This obvious situation with and explicitly
formulated by the Constitutional Court, which in the reasons
of decision Ho 22 of 10 December 1996 under cd. Ho 24/1996 e
noted that “private property of legal entities is
inviolable ”. The same decision that was made on the occasion
the declaration of a private receivable as state property continues
further, pointing out that “it (i.e. the claim) may be
forcibly expropriated, but only the conditions of art. 17, para 5 of
The Constitution - the presence of state needs that can not
be satisfied otherwise and after advance and
equivalent compensation.

The application of the 10-year term under Art. 56, para. VAT on
in respect of a right of use established for remuneration and under
the established order before the entry into force of this law for a period of 50
years, defines as the unequivocal purpose and effect of the disputed
legal provision its alienating effect. Of course, because
the nature of the legal provision, its effect is general and
extends to an indefinite number of cases. that's why
the circumstances of the present case are pointed out here only for the purpose of
stand out (and explain) Her real action on the occasion of one

actual, not a hypothetical legal relationship. It's different
the question that this action as such determines its
unconstitutionality in general, and not only for
the needs of the particular case.

In fact, it is the general effect of the law (respectively
the legal provision in question) as intended
legislative act with alienating effect (in the sense and in the expression of
the said decision Ho 22 under cd. X 26/1996) puts it in
contradiction with art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution. As
the alienating effect occurs as a direct result of the application
of the law itself, i.e. of a general norm, as such it according to
definition - given its content - can not fulfill
the requirements of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution - a provision which under
the words of the Constitutional Court ”contains the criteria under which it is
constitutionally permissible property rights belonging to
individuals to be prejudiced to an extent that includes
and their alienation from the state ”(decision He 17 of 16 December
ро уу ллиииии лии ик

Even assuming that the state is not limited by
The Constitution, when it regulates the conditions under which it is ordered
with the properties - private state property, including in which
establishes the right of use on such property - an understanding that
here it is at first disputed when it comes to alienation, “the important one
limiter ”, which is the provision of art. 17, para 5 (under Art
the expression of decision Ho 17 under cd. Ho 14/1999), of course
continues to operate No> there are considerations from
constitutional order to repeal it. That's exactly what it is
consists of the constitutional protection of property. It is clear that
The Constitution allows in principle - in Article 17, paragraph 5 - such an impact
(restriction) of the right of ownership (of the right of private
property) by the state, which may reach a degree
and forced expropriation. But it is also clear that such
“Deprivation of possession” (according to the successful expression of art. 1, 51, sentence 2
of the Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights
of man) can be done only on the basis of law and in compliance
of the other conditions provided in this constitutional text.
(The expropriation effect that occurs as a result of
premature termination of a contract for assignment of a right
of use for a certain period, unconditionally constitutes “deprivation of
possession ”ie this meaning is obvious.)

The provision of 6 6 MANPADS does not meet the requirements
of the constitutional norm and is not a "law" in the sense referred to by
her.

It does not contain those prerequisites for its application,
to serve as a basis for alienation in each individual
such as the specification of the need for expropriation -
in view of the condition that it cannot be satisfied in another way
way, as well as the determination of advance and equivalent
compensation, which is a condition that must precede itself
expropriation. By the way, given the effect of the contested
provision, its expropriation effect occurs by itself, p
its entry into force without it being possible to take into account the specifics of
individual cases, respectively to determine which compensation is
appears "equal" in each of them. In this regard, it should
the understanding is also taken into account (expressed in connection with art. 30 of the Law
for cultural monuments and museums - respectively on the occasion of
decision Ho 5 of 21 March 1996 under c.d. He 4/1996), according to which no
it is necessary for each (alienating) law to reproduce accurately
17, para 5 of the Constitution, and it is enough to refer to
the established procedure for expropriation of state and municipal properties
needs. In the present case, however, the contested provision is completely ignored
its alienating action, as if it did not exist. She does not
provides for no "individualization" of the case to take into account
constitutional conditions - and in terms of the specific need and
the impossibility of satisfying it in any other way, and from a point of view
of the preliminary equivalent compensation.

2. From our point of view, the next in importance
unconstitutional (from the point of view of
the sequence of their exposition here, not as gradation
of their gravity) is a violation of the principle of legal
state, proclaimed in art. 4, para 1.

The provision of 5 6 MANPADS does not meet the requirements for
quality of the law from the point of view of this constitutional one as well
principle.

In one of its decisions - Ho 9 of June 20, 1996 under k, d. He 9/1996
d- although in another, specific context, the Constitutional Court is
constitutionalized the norm of art. 14, para 3 of the LNA, having interpreted
the prohibition of retroactive effect of laws as a general constitutional one
principle of Bulgarian law, as a manifestation of the principles of
rule of law and legality.

Also in terms of the situation in which he finds himself
our company have special relevance
the considerations developed in the request in relation to the contradiction with
Art. 4, para of the Constitution, on the plane of the possible ones
considerations of the legislator that may justify such
legislative approach.

Maintaining that such do not exist in principle, you are
we allow the Constitutional Court to draw attention to
Hobot decision of 25 February 1997 under c.d. Ho 32/1996 (SG, issue 21
since 1997). In the grounds of that judgment, the court, on the one hand,
he has exhaustively indicated the provisions of the Constitution itself
hypotheses in which the legislator is given the right to settle,
respectively to restrict the freedom of economic initiative under
legislative order and, on the other hand, has formulated the principle that
free business initiative can always be limited to
view the protection of other constitutional values ​​(which are also
none of the hypotheses in question,
respectively other constitutional values ​​cannot justify
constitutional level state intervention by legislative
way in a certified legal relationship in which she is a party in her capacity
of an equal subject, and not as a bearer of power
powers.

Even if it is assumed that the basis of the dispute
legislative permission lie any considerations for
liquidation of cases of unjustified transfers of goods or
in general of expediency, as presupposed by
the panel seised by the Constitutional Court remains unresolved
the issue of compensation of state counterparties for
the actual harms and lost profits suffered by them in
as a result of the early termination of valid contracts,
concluded with the state on the basis of trust in the current
their conclusion legal and legitimate (ie on the basis of
Constitution) expectations for the stability of the legal order. That's right
with the inadmissibility through a special law to be rearranged economically
relations to the detriment of the constitutionally guaranteed rights of
economic operators, which derives from the principle of legal
state, the requirement for> fairness reappears
(“Preliminary and equivalent”) compensation. Individual cases do not
are hypothetical and concrete. Such is the case that gave rise to
referral to the Constitutional Court, in which the term for which it is
ceded the right of use is adequate to the paid (in
April 1990) price, so there is an equivalence that is
violated by the termination of the legal relationship long before
the expiration of the term.

3. By the way, we find that all these issues,
including all the grounds before the Constitutional Court
for unconstitutionality, has been successfully united - given and
of the connection between the separate grounds - in decision Ho 17 under c.d. Ho
14/1999. It remains to be cited from the grounds of that decision

an emphasis on it, based on a reference to a decision rendered
in 1993: "It is the duty of the state to guarantee and protect
the inviolability of private property by law | and is |
it is inadmissible to encroach on this in a legislative way
inviolability ”.

4. In view of the current practice of the Constitutional Court,
and in view of the existence of compelling reasons for
establishing the unconstitutionality of the provision of 6 6
MANPADS, “the ruling on this request makes it irrelevant
the assessment under Art. 149, para 1, item 4 of the Constitution.

In this way, the Constitutional Court has acted, for example,
on cd. Ho 13/1997, under c.d. Ho 6/1998 and under cd. Ho 4/1999, but
there are also examples in which the court has ruled on the latter
request - decision Ho 2 of 21 January 1999 under c.d. X 33/1998

By maintaining that the request is well-founded on the board
of the non-compliance of 6 6 of the RZDP with Art from the Extra
Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights and that
a declaratory decision in this sense would increase the authority
of the act of the Constitutional Court, at the same time we note that for
the needs of the proceedings under Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Constitution,
the consequences of declaring the provision for
unconstitutional, arising from the action of art. 151, para 2,
sentence 3 of the Constitution are sufficient.

For these reasons, we state once again that the request is
reasonably and please respect it.