on

The Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI) supports the request of
Supreme Administrative Court, III> Department of> Establishment
the unconstitutionality of> the provision of 8 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions (TFR) of the State Property Act (STA).

BCCI fully shares the arguments set out in the above request and
considers that the following "additional" grounds for
unconstitutionality of the considered norm:

1 The text in question contradicts the constitutional one
requirement for protection of investments - art. 19, para. 3.

Prior to the entry into force of the LSA, the current legislation (mainly
The Property Act and the Ordinance on State Property), with small
exceptions (eg Article 68 of the Property Act - still in force) no
set a limit on the term of the right of use. That made it possible
of the parties to the contract for use to agree on terms longer than 10 years.
It is logical that these cases involve significant investments
from the users of state properties for a certain activity, resp. -
their restoration in the longer period of use. Entrepreneurs bind
the amount of investments> mostly with the predictability of the term for
their recovery.

It is obvious that by reducing the term of the right to
use, the provision of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA contradicts the principle of
investment protection. Art. 19, para. 3 of the Constitution obliges “the legislator
to issue laws protecting and therefore encouraging investment, not
laws encroaching on investments already made ”(as decided by Me 4 / 11.03.1998
year according to const. case of the Ministry of Defense of 16/1997; also resh. MO 4 / 11.03.1998 under the const.
case MO 16/1997 of the Constitutional Court).

2. The rationing of the term of a contractually established right of use
contradicts one of the basic principles of the rule of law (Art.
4 of the Constitution) - the freedom of bargaining.

By managing private state> property, incl. and through
the granting of the right of use, the state, through the persons authorized by it
and as an equal subject in the civil turnover (decided on the case Mo
11/1993 of the Constitutional Court) negotiates with third parties the conditions of this
use, incl. and term. The norm of 8 6 of the TFP of ZDS inadmissibly regulates
change of the contractual terms of use concerning the term. In his practice
The Constitutional Court has categorically held that interference in
civil legal relations, as in an administrative way (eg res. mo
22 / 24.09.1998 under the const. case of the Ministry of Defense 18/1998) and by law (eg res.
To 17 / 16.12.1999 under the const. case MO 14/1999).

3. With the adoption of the provision of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA it is violated
the constitutional principle of separation of powers (Art. 8 of
Constitution), as the norm regulates relations that are from
competence of the executive branch (Article 106 of the Constitution) and not
of the legislature.

According to Art. 106 of the Constitution, the Council of Ministers organizes
the management of state property. The norm applies to both types
state property (public and private) and covers a set of activities -
the maintenance of state property, its use, the collection of income
etc. (thus decided by the Ministry of Defense 19 / 21.12.1993 on the case of the Ministry of Defense 11/1993
The Constitutional Court). It is indisputable that the performance of these activities involve
and the granting of real rights through which the property is maintained, used
and gives the state income.

Therefore, in the content of the constitutional concept "organized
the management of the state property ”includes the granting of a right
of use.

The Council of Ministers organizes the management of state property,
by issuing acts to empower the bodies they will manage and yes
regulates the order in which this activity will be carried out (cited decision no
19 / 21.12.1993).

Therefore, the regulation of the right to use the state
property is within the competence of the Council of Ministers

It is inadmissible for the legislature to revoke or amend decisions
which according to the Constitution are within the competence of the Council of Ministers, respectively - of its
organs.

4. The considered provision does not correspond to art. 1 of First
Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights; and
fundamental freedoms, resp. - the case law of the Court of Human Rights.

In its decisions in the Zrogopd cases, it was Goppgoy and MagsKh.
that the approved in the above-cited Art. 1 principle of respect for the right of
property (including the regulation of its use) requires compliance with
"A full balance to be struck between the protection of the law
of property and the requirements of the common interest ”.

The text of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA in no way provides this
balance for the reasons set out above in p. 1i2.

For all the reasons set out so far, the Bulgarian trade
Chamber of Industry considers that the norm of 8 6 of the TFP of the LSA is
unconstitutional.