Ladies and gentlemen, constitutional judges,

By order of 13 February 2001, the Constitutional Court of the Republic
Bulgaria constitutes the Minister of Regional Development and Public Works
as an interested party in the constitutional case Me1 / 2001, instituted under
request of a three-member panel of |! department of the Supreme Administrative Court
by the order of art. 150, para 2 of the Constitution, for “establishment
unconstitutionality and incompatibility with the European Convention on Protection
human rights and fundamental freedoms of par.b from the transitional and final
provisions of the State Property Act. :

In this regard, we consider that the provision of par. B of the TFP of the Law on
the state property does not contradict art. 17, para 3 and 5 and art. 19 of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, due to the following arguments:

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in Art. 17, para. 4 provides for the mode of
the objects of the state and municipal property to be determined by law. IN
implementation of this provision, the State Property Act has been adopted,
which is special in relation to the general Law on Property. In this sense
it should be assumed that the regulation of real rights over objects -
state property may deviate from the principle laid down in the general
law. According to Art. 62 of the Property Act, the provisions on
the right of use over state property shall apply, unless in law or in
an act establishing this right is provided otherwise.

It is necessary to keep in mind that in para. B the legislator aims at settlement
of legal relations in view of the quality of the object of use - state
property, and not according to the subject - the holder of the right of use.

The right of use is a real right over another's property, for which in art. 59 of
The Property Act provides for the possibility of limitation with a term.
The legislator did not explicitly regulate a certain term, considering that
the duration depends on the will of the property owner and is determined in
the deed of incorporation.

Since the right of use is in the category of personal rights, the law

provides to be repaid with the death of the user, respectively with
the termination of the user - legal entity. A ban has been created for
expropriation by the user and the owner is given the opportunity to
terminate early the right of use in case of violations of
significant obligations on the part of the user.

In the sense of the above, it can be concluded that after
the legislator in the general law introduces a number of restrictions on the right of
use and provides for the possibility of restrictions by a special law - Art. 62
of the Insurance Act, the norm of par. b of the TFP of the Insurance Act does not violate the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria does not contradict the rule of privacy
property.

If we accept the thesis advocated by the composition of || department of the Supreme
administrative court, this would mean assuming that the user has more
large or equal rights with the owner. The right to property is absolute
real right and establishing the right of use, the owner is deprived of
certain authority with regard to the exercise of property.

Furthermore, the rule at issue must be considered in the context of
the systematic place of art. 56, para 1 of the LSA, to which he refers. It does not apply
for the right of ownership, and for the right of use and concerning properties - private
state property, the rights to which are regulated by the Law on State Property.

The place of par.b, namely - in the transitional and final provisions of
the law shows that the aim is to bring it into line with the provision of
Article 56, paragraph 1 of the LSA all existing cases. Otherwise, it would be created
inequality with regard to the holders of the right of use over
state property depending on the time of establishment.

The statement that the provision of para.6 cannot be accepted unambiguously
of the TFP of the LSA leads to mandatory and unconditional termination of the right to
use of property - state property. In this case it is about
reduction of the term of the respective right of use, which does not exclude
the possibility to be re - established at a later date, subject to
the relevant legal requirements. This is aimed at protecting the state
interest, as the disposal of state property is carried out at
the conditions of the competitive start / tenders and competitions /.

The provision of para. B of the LSA does not contradict Article 19 of the Constitution,
as it creates conditions for equality of economic entities. The right
of use should not necessarily be subject to the existence of
business and initiatives.

The mode of> management of> state> property includes
mandatory balance and frequent assessment of dynamic needs and relationships in
the state. The finding that the state is a major owner of real estate
properties, cannot substantiate the request for revocation of par.b of the TFP of the LSA. On
this may be counteracted by the fact that as a result of the adoption of
a number of normative acts, as well as changes in the legislation of the Republic

Bulgaria, a huge number of properties passed from the state to the ownership of
municipalities and individuals. Moreover, in the Law on Political Parties, the Law on Political Parties,
The Labor Code, the Health Insurance Act, etc. was imputed to
obligation of the state to provide a building stock for a number of needs. Now,
especially in the district centers, there is an acute shortage of building stock for
administrative needs.

The unconditional interpretation of para. B of the TFP of the LSA as
expropriation procedure. Expropriation implies a change in the nature and
the type of ownership, as well as the need for equivalent compensation. IN
the cases of established right of use on state property, respectively
the application of par.b, there is no change of ownership. In most cases,
under the repealed Ordinance on state property, the established right
of use is free. In each case, the holder of the terminated
right of use has the possibility to file a claim for compensation
judicially.

The provision of para. B of the TFP of the State Property Act does not
contradicts Article 1 of the First Additional Protocol to the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, under the following
considerations:

The meaning of the term "property" embedded in the cited provision of
convention is not explicitly defined. Analyzed in its entirety,
we believe that the text guarantees fundamental rights and freedoms - one of which is
the real right of ownership, without regulating the limited real rights,
which are subject to detailed regulation in local legislation.

The minutes explicitly state that everyone has the right to benefit from
their property and no one may be deprived of it except in accordance with
the conditions provided by law. We believe that paragraph b6 of the TFP of the LSA corresponds
of the cited requirement, as by virtue of a legal provision it is unified
the regime of the right of use.

The protocol stipulates that everyone has the right to use their own
property and no one may be deprived of it except in the interest of
society. We believe that the basis of the provision of par. B of the TFP of the LSA is
namely the public interest, which requires the establishment of a right to
use of property - state property, to be as described in Article 56 of

ZDS ranks for a period not exceeding 10 years. Road