Dissenting opinion of Judges Nedelcho Beronov, Margarita Zlatareva and Vasil Gotsev The provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament, promulgated, SG No. 37 of 13 April 2001, the compliance of which with the Constitution is subject to consideration in the present case, in fact introduces criminal immunity of the candidates and their deputies, analogous to that of the Members of Parliament under Article 70 of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court has had the opportunity to rule in a definite manner that the exceptions to the rule that any person , who has committed a crime, is subject to criminal prosecution, are explicitly provided for in the Constitution - Decision № 3 of 7.03.1998 under c.d. № 1/98, promulgated, SG No. 29/1998. The decision lists the constitutionally admissible exceptions: Art. 70 - for the Members of Parliament; Art. 103, para 4 - for the President of the Republic and the Vice-President; 132, para 1 - for the judges, prosecutors and investigators, and art. 147, para 6 - for the members of the Constitutional Court. The Constitution does not allow other exceptions for criminal immunity. Those who express the dissenting opinion believe that there is no reason for the Constitutional Court to deviate from this unanimous opinion and now in the present case to rule in the opposite sense. Candidates for deputies and their deputies are participants in the election process to whom the law cannot created the privilege of not complying with penal provisions just because of their quality. Every citizen is obliged to observe the laws of the country and to respect the rights and legitimate interests of others - an obligation proclaimed by Article 58, paragraph 1 of the Constitution as one of the main constitutional obligations of citizens. Legislative extension of criminal immunity, albeit for a certain period, for persons holding various positions in the state system, beyond those constitutionally listed or even participating in the election process, means a violation of this constitutional obligation. This also means unequal treatment of citizens before the law. which violates another constitutionally guaranteed rule, raised in Art. 6, para 2, assoc. second of the Constitution as a basic constitutional principle. It cannot yet be argued that bringing the candidates to justice will violate their passive suffrage, because the question will immediately arise - and does not violate the right of victims to seek justice from the judiciary in the broadest sense? meaning of the word protection of their violated rights from the actions of the persons with the provided privilege (we are talking about a private prosecutor and a civil plaintiff in a criminal proceeding). Of course, for advocates even this consideration cannot be upheld. If it is assumed that the registration of persons in the lists of candidates and deputies changes their status compared to other citizens, it means that these persons occupy a social position, which is one of the social features, exhaustively listed in Art. 6, para 2, assoc. second of the Constitution and for which the creation of privileges is explicitly prohibited. In this sense is also Decision № 14/92, promulgated, SG, issue 93 of 1992. The only explanation and justification for violating the principle of equality before the law on criminal inviolability can be found only in the constitutionally established circle of persons enjoying immunity. (Although the content of the notion of immunity from the various constitutionally designated persons enshrined in the Constitution varies, it includes criminal inviolability everywhere.) Recognition that a law may expand the circle of such persons runs the risk of any parliamentary majority being able to determine various positions and terms in which criminal prosecution is excluded. The shorter or longer term of the criminal inviolability granted by law cannot be an argument for constitutionality of the legal provision. It is not a consideration in favor of compliance of the provision with the Constitution and the fact that it was introduced as Article 45, paragraph 1 of the Law on Election of the Grand National Assembly (promulgated, SG No. 28/1990) and is repeated in the various electoral laws to date. In view of the above considerations, the authors of the dissenting opinion accept that the provision of Article 53, paragraph 1 of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament contradicts constitutional principles and basic constitutionally regulated obligations of citizens. to declare it unconstitutional.