OPINION Hu ma

From Prof. DSc Dimitar Kolarov - President of the Union of
foresters in Bulgaria

Subject: Declaring unconstitutionality of Art. 4, Art. 7
para 1, art. 29, Art. Article 30 31 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act

Dear Constitutional Judges,

The Union of Foresters in Bulgaria, after getting acquainted with
the request of a group of MPs for
the unconstitutionality of the above articles of the Hunting Act and
game conservation (ZLOD) considers that:

1. art. 4 fromZLOD

None of the MPs disputes the fact that
the game is state property. Once this is a fact,
the legislator has the right to assign to a state body, c
case the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to implement
state policy in the field of hunting management
holding, as well as the control over the management of the game. This is not
monopoly, and the right to interpret the government to be assigned
of a state body in view of its responsibility before
the public in our country on the application of ZLOD.

2. Art. 7 para 1 of ZLOD

In the provision of art. 7, para the legislator has accepted that the hunting
area of ​​the country is distributed to hunting areas,
regardless of fund boundaries and forest ownership and
water areas. MPs believe this
contradicts the Constitution, which states that the right of
property and inheritance are guaranteed and protected by law.

According to the hunting science and practice the game ss
manages on a population basis. This means that the game is
breeds and inhabits areas where there are different species
property - private, state, municipal, monastery, school.
In addition, the game migrates and cannot be nailed
specific hunting area in order to seek a connection with
forest and land ownership. The legislator, proceeding from
these circumstances to protect the equality of all
properties, has created Art. 38 in ZLOD. The law also provides
payment of damages caused by the game to the property. Except
that the owners of forests and lands receive money
compensation for the fact that their property falls into hunting
area. All this shows that the villain does not contradict
The Constitution does not harm the interests of the> different
owners of forests and lands in terms of hunting.

Art. 29, Art. 30 and Art. 31 of ZLOD

In them the legislator regulates the right of association of
persons who have acquired the right to hunt. The suspicions of
MPs in terms of what hunters can
to be left without hunting areas and that they will not be able to exercise there
your right to economic activity and hunting trip.

With the entry into force of a new Law on Persons and Families - SG
no. 8181/2000, in the section for "associations", all are regulated
rights and obligations of the persons who formed such associations. Yes
that the Hunting Squad, or Hunting Squads, forming
associations, creating their own statutes, can be sure that in
their area, the hunting areas will be managed by them and
they will take care of the management, reproduction, protection and
the use of game.