ADDITIONAL REASONS AND CONSIDERATIONS

According to CD Ho 13 and M 14 0t 2001 by Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

You have allowed for consideration a dispute over the legality of the election of the people
representative. The lawfulness dispute involves deciding what is legal
situation and everything else will result from that. The legal situation always
is only one, only. Two opposing truths in law cannot
coexist and Ina poui: sipa (the court knows the laws).

In this presentation, I will present to you only the facts in their
chronology, I will also dwell on the constitutional principles and legal provisions
as I am convinced that the only thing you will be guided by in the judgment is

the will to obey the law and restore the law.

When and how was my registration canceled?

This happened with decision 90 /09.06.t.g. of RIK-Razgrad. National movement
Simeon II (NMSS) submitted an application the day before requesting this
on the grounds of art. 48, para 5 of ZINP. By virtue of this text for me should.
there is “data on the agent's past” in order to have valid legal consequences.
As a Member of Parliament in several successive parliaments, I have been screened
from commissions with different statutes, and in the latter case - under the VAT Act

I appeared in the report with the so-called informers. I will not expose here

in front of you in detail everything that was reported in the media to my address, but
it became public later that I was developed by two without my knowledge
management, but I was removed from the report because of “conflictual nature, not amenable to
processing, talks a lot and is unmanageable ”. However, someone left some cardboard.
I enclose a statement of K Chakarov, unknown to me, on the issue,
published in the press.

It is quite natural when I was deregistered in such a disgraceful way
from RIK Razgrad, at least to defend my name and guided by faith,
that you cannot be disenfranchised in a country without guilt, I appealed

the decision of the REC-Razgrad before the CEC, which (the CEC) decided by decision 330 that I

 

I have no legal interest in this !!! And who else should have a legal interest?
Isn't my name affected? And how? - The Commission under the VAT Act is not for me
announced in the report on the contributors, no evidence of links with
DS, and I really did not cooperate! What could I do in this one?
situation, in addition to referring the dispute to the Supreme Administrative Court (SAC). Until this one
moment I did not know the details of your decision 10/97, but I assure you when
I studied it, at least for myself, I found solace, because I lived with the thought that
everything that happens to me is against constitutional human rights and
you yourself have announced such disclosure in a disgraceful context for
people who are not guilty, for unconstitutional. Except affecting mine
honor and good name, I found myself guilty of something I didn't do, up to
no evidence has been presented to date. And the administration,
charged with conducting the elections, did not undertake to trample constitutionally
guaranteed rights and principles. Isn't the CEC obliged to be guided only by
only from the Constitution and the laws of the country, despite the fact that it is a function of
political will? If the Constitution is the supreme law for all of us,
citizens of this country, how is it not for the members of the CEC?

On 15.06. The SAC annulled Decision 330 of the CEC and declared the
decision “X690 of RIK-Razgrad Meanwhile, the SAC with decision 4270 was

also declared invalid the decision 288 of the CEC, which gave the opportunity

the files to be removed from the sheets by the so-called certificates, and with that
and their names were announced, albeit indirectly.

THE DECLARATION BY YOU OF DECISION 90 OF THE REC
DISSOLUTION OF NULL MEANS THAT IN TECHNIK OF THE WHOLE
PRE-ELECTION PERIOD FROM 16.05. UNTIL 17.06. MY REGISTRATION
OF THE CANDIDATE FOR NATIONAL REPRESENTATIVE AS LEADER OF
THE RAZGRAD LIST OF NMSS WAS LEGALLY PERFECT
AND WITHOUT INTERRUPTION.

On the contrary, from a legal point of view, Irena Varadinova was not
registered, WAS NOT VALIDLY REGISTERED FOR A SINGLE DAY
AS A CANDIDATE FOR NATIONAL REPRESENTATIVE.

However, the CEC did not comply with the court's rulings. Ice ev! Diaz's ears
(The court decision is like a legal provision)? The logical conclusion is that its laws
court decisions in our country do not apply to everyone equally. YOU
declared the invalidity of the decision of REC Razgrad, after it was taken in
violation of a constitutional decision, in violation of ZINI, and Decision 288 of
The CEC has already been declared null and void. Moreover, for nullity the court must.
to monitor ex officio - on the one hand, and on the other - I myself have the right to
I appeal, despite the fact that the ZINP has not provided anything special for this one
case. But by virtue of your decisions - X21/95. and the considerations under cd He7 / 95g. -

Article 120, paragraph 2 of the CRB provides an opportunity to appeal the acts of anyone

 

administrative body, unless the law expressly prohibits this, especially
when it comes to the constitutional rights of citizens.

The essential question is how they are from a decision declared null and void
valid legal consequences have arisen, as in practice (such is the one established in
Bulgaria since the existence of administrative law) a null and void decision no
gives rise to the intended legal consequences of its author. Moreover, the question in question
nullity was declared by the Supreme Administrative Court.

Decision 131 of REC Razgrad does not create a new legal situation with regard to
of my registration, it only orders the district governor to print

newsletters with my name on it. The decision confirms my initial registration

from 16.05 this year, but even without it it (my initial registration) is valid.
The annulment of decision 131 of the DEC with decision 345 of the CEC does not concern at all
my initial registration. Decision 28 of 16.05. of RIK-Razgrad in general
not canceled! Whether a valid registration is confirmed one, two or three
times it has no bearing on its validity and it is valid until it is
canceled. Even if CEC Decision 345 was not declared null and void by the SAC
June 19, this year, my registration as a candidate would still be perfect, because
with decision 345 of the CEC, Decision 28 of DEC Razgrad was not attacked at all, but by
on the other hand, decision131 of the DEC does not affect my status as duly registered
candidate, and has a declarative character, in the sense that I am the leader of NMSS and
imperative - by ordering the printing of ballots in my name. For me
of great importance is the fact that on Saturday night by virtue of an appeal (even in
at the moment it does not matter that the petitioner was not legitimate in my case) only
hours before the start of the vote, the CEC may request to cancel one
registration of a candidate for MP! You, DEAR
CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, can you justify such a thing? You think
Is it possible that in our Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Bulgaria a text can be found,
to defend such a situation? The rights of the individual and his
dignity, security and the rule of law, the guarantee of the free development of
human and civil society, equality before the law, the responsibility of
the state ... how are they observed in the described case?

Why a person who is not registered as a candidate for the people at all
representative was announced elected in decision 348 of the CEC? And why I'm not
declared an elected Member of Parliament?

Decision 345 of the CEC was taken at the request of I Kostov, the leader of another.
a political force that has nothing to do with my registration, which is why

it was declared null and void in the part concerning me by YOU.

Why isn't my name on all the ballots?
A sufficient number of ballots with my name were initially printed

at the top of the NMSS list - about 150,000 for Razgrad region and 27,000 for

Europe. After decision 4421 of the Supreme Administrative Court from 15.06. on the same date at its meeting
RIK Razgrad refused to consider my case on the grounds that they did not have the decision, despite
that I personally told him on the phone after taking it, and later to them
I faxed. Meanwhile, the CEC sent them a letter telling them that
the SAC's decision had not entered into force because they intended to
appealed and ordered them not to comply with it. And without even having it
formal meeting of the CEC and have voted for such a decision! The President of
RIK Razgrad V. Nanev personally called me on the evening of June 15, that it was necessary
to send them the original stamped decision of the SAC by the next day 8:00
in the morning. In the evening I sent the decision by courier. On June 19, this year, Saturday
in the morning, RIK Razgrad meets from 8:00 am and sets a new condition - the decision
of the SAC to be notarized and submitted in triplicate. Oh that
I did, despite my bewilderment, that the original copy with the solution of
YOU (charged, certified, with wet seals) may arouse suspicion of infidelity
and how so when I notarize it, it becomes perfect ?! At 9:50 RIK Razgrad
decides 131 - to print ballots with my name and announces it publicly in
the municipal building. Immediately our associates at the headquarters of NMSS Razgrad
contact the regional governor Neycho Georgiev to find the ballots with
my name. They are told that the ballots are missing. The district governor
flatly refuses to print new ballots with my name and delivers them to the DEC
Razgrad ballots with the name of Irena Varadinova at the top of the NMSS list, which
it was not registered at all after the annulment of decision 90 of REC Razgrad. I
I wrote a letter to RIK - Razgrad that they should only hand out ballots with my name on them.
In the afternoon, the distribution of ballots to representatives of
section commissions. RIK Razgrad no longer had any of its members. But
in front of the room is placed in a prominent place Decision 131, which states that
NMSS participates in the elections with its initial registration, ie. with leaf guide
Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov. However, ballots with a different name are distributed.
It is beyond my power to influence this process. Obviously, after
as there is no legal norm according to which I can intervene in

the printing and distribution of ballots, at least I am responsible and

I should bear the negative consequences of non - compliance with the decisions of
the court by the authorized civil servants and institutions.

On the other hand, sufficient numbers have been sent to Europe in advance
newsletters with my name on it. But on 15.06 this year (exactly when the SAC overturned the decision of
CEC and the respective DEC for cancellation of my registration! And at noon
all media spread this news) Ministry of Foreign Affairs
sends an express letter to the diplomatic missions and consular posts in
those countries by which it notifies them that my name has been deleted from the NMSS list and
to vote with the ballots of Irena Varadinova and only if they do not reach or
they have not sent any newsletters with my name on them.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs did nothing on June 15 this year either. nor on 16.06. to notify
representations for the new situation created by Decision 4421 of the SAC ir.131
of RIK Razgrad. At least there were enough newsletters available, one of which was yours
attach. It is not clear what ballots were used to vote - my name or that of
Irena Varadinova.

Immediately after the decision of the Supreme Administrative Court, the CEC spokeswoman, Mrs. Negentsova
made an official statement, quoted in the media, that it didn't matter with what.
the ballot is voted. "The electoral system is proportional and there is no name
meaning, the rest will be decided later. "

These are the facts. It is clear that if on 15.06. this year or even the next day,
first, the regional governor Peycho Georgiev had fulfilled his obligations
and had delivered the printed ballots in my name to the Razgrad REC, not them
he had hidden or destroyed, or had ordered new ones to be printed
such, and secondly, if Stoyan Todorov from the departmental commission for the elections at
The Ministry of Interior had sent an expert letter to the DP and CP of the Republic of Bulgaria in Europe that I
I am the legitimate candidate, there would be no dispute about mine
election and perhaps the CEC itself would not take Decision 345 at 7:30 p.m.
before the election. The above-mentioned two persons have grossly violated its laws
the decision of the SAC and RIK Razgrad as they prevented my election as a people's representative
representative. Gova is a criminal offense under Art. 167, 1996 and 169c of Art

Penal Code, which is punishable by up to five years in prison. Precisely because of

this crime, however, I am not declared elected, but another person, How then
a crime consumes favorable consequences for offenders, and
for the victim to keep the negatives? From Roman law to the present day in all
legal systems is based on the principle that no one can take advantage of one
crime to reap the benefits. How in Bulgaria, for which the National Assembly is
the most important body of power by virtue of Art. 1, para of the Constitution can be
broadcast illegitimate representatives with the help of other, again state bodies?
When it becomes clear that this is possible, the logical question is “How
so the district governors can (and the court cannot) decide who they are
legitimate candidates and the CEC to provide them with the relevant certificates for
chosen? ”

As the case has received a great deal of attention in the mass media,
to all voters in Razgrad on Friday and Saturday before the elections
it became clear that the leader of the movement's list was Ventseslav Dimitrov. Convinced
I think that with my actions, meetings and messages to the voters during
the whole campaign (except the last 5 days) I am the person with whom
the voter in Razgrad made contact and to whom he gave his trust.

A candidate for MP cannot run for office
the voter and win their vote in 5 days. Especially considering that
Irena Varadinova herself was notified of the lawsuits and awaited them
exit. My doubts are that there was an unspoken agreement between
the representatives of the state in the person of the regional governor P Georgiev, CEC,
Ministry of Interior and REC Razgrad for spoiling the elections as even before the decision
345 of the CEC, taken at 7.30 pm on 16.06 this year, to distribute ballots with the name of a person,
unregistered as a candidate. Otherwise so many coincidences would not coincide.
However, this is a conspiracy against the rule of law, against the state itself and in practice
succeeded in announcing Irena Varadinova as elected MP
instead of Ventseslav Dimitrov.

And it now depends on the Constitutional Court whether it will legalize the results of this conspiracy. It touches
for illegal actions of state bodies not only against me as a candidate

for a Member of Parliament, but also against the judiciary and the rule of law.

Resolving this dispute is important to me, but its nature is not private

legal, and public law. The CEC demonstrates to everyone that everything it has

to happen is AB oshi ogshagit (pre-decided) and whatever actions

to do whatever the court decides will be as the CEC decides
DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The attitude towards me from the administration building during the elections
it was absolutely inexplicable. First, because there is no legal norm in force
to whom an administrative body should be placed above the court and above the law, secondly,
because such unjustified actions are literally reminiscent of politics
repression, and thirdly, because THIS CAN HAPPEN TO EVERYONE, if with something
don't like it.

I turn to each of you because the institution that
you represent builds your image and authority thanks to the qualities of
each of you individually, in this sense you yourself, especially from the present
the position you have, you would be even more polarized than the Bulgarian one
society at your next professional appearances. The situation in which I myself
I fell out, unfortunately it can be explained not by legal provisions, but by
categories outside the law. And this is the absurdity when a state institution, from
the strength of its positions of power can afford to pursue a policy based on,
who he likes and who he doesn't. My hope is that you will thwart everyone's intentions
an administrative body to place its personal antipathies higher than the duty to
observes the laws and the established order in the country. Once the Constitution gives us
the right to freely choose our professions, to express an opinion and to defend
positions, no one has the right to sanction us for this if we have not committed a crime
allowed.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

I will summarize what has been said so far in the words of Prof. Georg Jelinek: “The activity of
state bodies are in fact state activity itself. .. „in any legal norm
there is a guarantee for the subordinates that while it is acting, it does NOT bind itself
State (“General Doctrine of the State”, Sofia-R, Sofia 1993, pp.390-391) C

the foreword to the cited work Prof. St. Balamezov points out that “the state is

limited by the law which it itself creates, and its activity is
subject to this right. "And that it is impossible" to assume that the state is not
bound by the law which it itself establishes ”(ibid., p. 3) If this
It is really so, do we have a state or not? The Dossier Commission,
Are the CEC, the REC, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the regional governor part of our country?
or not?

Without a doubt for everyone in our society solving
the present dispute is relevant because it will either give the key to the implementation of
rules according to personal attitude, or will confirm one endured for years
principle - OF STATEHOOD.

The non-observed decision of the SAC in my case gave rise to other cases
(I mean> the revoked license of Nova TV) to be questioned
The "correctness and legality" of the judgments of the Supreme Administrative
court. If in our society it is possible the bodies to which the judiciary belongs
decisions to assess their convenience, correctness, etc., then for what legal order
are we talking No administrative body, nor any person,
affected by a judgment, to afford the discretion of the Court! Have you thought about it
you are what would happen if someone refuses to fulfill yours - the Constitutional
court decision? In the case of my candidate, my registration as a CEC directly said:
"The decision of the Supreme Administrative Court does not matter to us, the dispute will be resolved by the Constituent Assembly
court ”. If tomorrow someone thinks that in his opinion the decision of the Constitutional Court does not matter,
let the dispute be settled in, say, the European Court of Justice. You, how will you defend its status
the authority of the court? Are the authorities then divided or the executive can

is he mocking the court?

Conspiracy between the Dossier Commission and the CEC
The plot outlined above arose earlier when persons involved in
CEC, etc. The Dossiers Committee agreed to adopt Decision 288 of the
05.06.2001 of the CEC, which gives the right to the Dossier Commission to issue and
so called certificates for "agency past", except for the Report, which is provided in

ЗДДБСБРУГЩ. This part of CEC Decision 288 was declared null and void

Decision 4270 of the SAC. It is interesting to note, however, that the issuance of
the certificates start even before the CEC has ruled on Decision 288.
For example, NMSS was issued a certificate 013 from 04.06.2001 (in my case)
Who ordered the CEC and the Dossier Commission to do such things? Those are all
they are still part of the executive branch in that country and if they do not work according to
The constitution and the laws, and against them, mean working against the foundations of itself
country. CEC with Decision 288 of 05.06 this year gave "right" to the Dossier Commission
to issue to the parties and coalitions a new document, not described in the respective law -
so called certificates for registered persons. It is on the basis of these certificates
The DECs also canceled the registration. (However, REC Varna refused
to comply with these "documents" due to their unconstitutionality). More
late after decision 4270 of the SAC of 12.06 this year, during the cases in the SAC
the CEC representatives supported a completely different thesis - that it did not matter how
the parties and coalitions have got acquainted with the list of the registered, ie. that
the document (the proof!) is not important, but the judgment that the parties themselves are
did. (But Article 48, paragraph 5 of the ZINP speaks of data!). It is the CEC, again on the occasion
of art. 48 of ZINP, with regard to the circumstances in para 4, with r.280 from 01.06-t.g.
requires explicit medical or other identification documents in case of replacement
of one candidate with another (ie evidence!). With the very presentation of
the certificates under art. 48, para 5 of ZINP in the part outside the Report of the Commission on
the files are made public, which is rude
violation of their rights, of the Constitution and of Decision of the Constitutional Court 10 of 22
September 1997. It is indeed a public announcement because there is no other
possibility for deregistration of the respective candidates. That it existed
an agreement between members of the two commissions - on the files and the CEC, is also evident in
the statements made by some of their representatives to the media. And here
it is a gross violation of the political rights of candidates, which
is also an offense under the Penal Code. The impudence of the CEC representatives during
proceedings before the Supreme Administrative Court - V. Georgiev, I. Rizova and R. Negentsova, went so far as to
their direct allegations during the meetings before the SAC they claimed that

the candidates for MPs had no legal interest in appealing to

deregistration, do not have their own political rights, that they are “with an agency
past ”and“ disputable morality ”. It is no coincidence that the CEC decided 288
on 05.06. this year, in order to justify already issued illegally certificates, but also for
to prevent possible appeals before the SAC precisely because of the lack of
enough time until election day. For the same reason, the Commission on
the files were not issued legally, etc. certificates at the beginning of the campaign or
before her. As you can see, there are too many coincidences to be accidental. Here
why I think it is a premeditated conspiracy
against the Constitution and the rule of law by influential representatives of
the targeted state institutions.
DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

I would like to draw your attention to the following facts:

1. Chapter five of the ZINP is entitled “Candidates for Members of Parliament” and not
"Political parties and coalitions", i.e. at the center of the relationship that
arise on the occasion of the election campaign is placed precisely the candidate, 4
not the party, resp. coalition Logically, this statement was taken from
the constitutionally established provisions under which the right to passive
a vote with an important political right of the citizens (not of the parties) and not of the parties and
formations, and CITIZENS are the expressions of political will.
Political formations only “contribute to the formation and expression of
the political will of the citizens ”- Art., para 3 of the CRB By virtue of
The Constitution and the ZINP the candidate (not the political force) with the holder of
a number of rights - recognition of the status of an official, the right to register
advocates, to have immunity and to be elected. The current ZINP defends
powers of the candidates for Members of Parliament after the registration of
the candidate lists with the restrictions set for the parties and coalitions by
the ZINP itself (certain conditions and terms are set). Here is an example: B
Article 48, paragraph 4 of the Law on Public Procurement provides for the possibility when a candidate “dies or
fall into a permanent inability to participate in the elections, the party or the coalition
may propose a new candidate. " In this case, as I mentioned above, s

decision 280 / 1.6.2001 The CEC requires these facts to be proved before the DEC because

it is not enough just an application from the candidate, but it is necessary to be
submitted "relevant medical certificates or other documents".
(I also attach p.280 of the CEC). The cited decision 280 of the CEC comes to show that it does not
deregistration may be indiscriminately performed during the campaign and
there must be evidence of the event or condition for it to be valid
legal consequences of it. And what is the yardstick with which the CEC measured in
the next hypothesis - of Article 48, paragraph 5 of the LESD? What is the proof?
presented that I have collaborated with the former DS? I dwell in detail below
on the fax with which this was done, but here I will only inform you that on the case
a prosecutor's inspection has already been ordered with a letter from Heb451 / 19.07.2001, a copy of which
attach.

2. In the course of the court proceedings before the SAC, the representatives of the CEC
objected that the REC should also be constituted as a party to the cases,
Razgrad. By virtue of the established legal situation, these two bodies are
find in a relationship of bound competence. The DECs are being implemented and are being implemented
obey all decisions and follow the instructions of the CEC. What country can
to be the REC then and whose interest will it be? Not to mention that when
As for the declaration of nullity, the court may do so ex officio without

there is a case. And my legal interest is so obvious that it cannot be proved.

What determines the choice - the list or the ballot?

Decision X1 of the Constitutional Court of 1994 treats a similar case, but under the old law on
election of members of parliament. It is about a person, not registered iv
the list and in the ballot, for a person who did not have the qualities of a candidate for the People's Party
representative throughout the campaign from listing to election.

Naturally, the most logical thing is to have compliance and full coverage
between the registered candidate list and the names and arrangement of
the candidates in the ballot. In the case in question, there is a discrepancy between
the candidate list registered in RIK Razgrad and the ballots distributed to
NMSS. Article 74, paragraph 2 of the ZINP states that they are noted in the bulletin

"... the names of the persons on the candidate list" Obviously in the handed out

NMSS bulletins from REC Razgrad and partly in Europe the names of the persons
entered in the ballot do not correspond to the person on the candidate list. IN
Article 80, paragraph 1 indicates that the ballots are received by the section commissions “before
election day ”, i.e. on Saturday 16.06. (The date is important because Decision 131 of the REC North
full force on that day and it was only legal to hand out ballots in my name
as the leader of the NMSS list.) But on the contrary, all PECs are
received from REC Razgrad on that day wrong bulletins of NMSS regarding
of the leader of the list as the name of Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov intentionally and
It was maliciously replaced by the name of Irena Varadinova.

Val. 97, para 3, item 2 of ZINP it is said that her vote is recognized as valid
when “there are deviations in the ballots due to defects and errors in
production. ” And in the same article, but in para 4 it is said that “an envelope that does not contain
ballots according to the established pattern ... corresponds to one invalid vote, ”
The question here is whether the ballots in which
deliberately by the state bodies in charge of conducting the election have placed
another person who does not have the qualities of a candidate for MP in the position
of this candidate who has a perfect, confirmed by the SAC registration?

There are no other explanations in the ZINP. (In the old law in art. 77, para 2 extremely clear
it is said that in case of discrepancy in the ballot and the list, the vote is considered
valid and “counted as submitted for the respective list in the area” In the new one
However, there is no such definite text in the law) However, in the new ZINP
implies that an official document of fact is
the duly registered candidate list, not the ballot. Which of the above two
hypotheses is applicable to the case at hand? Maybe the first because in
in fact, all ballots have already been recognized for
actual votes for NMSS. If the Constitutional Court accepts the second hypothesis as valid, this
means that the elections in 18 MIR Razgrad are flawed because the votes for NMSS
should be declared invalid. ZINP does not provide another opportunity. But
if the first hypothesis is accepted, it will mean that it is elected popular
representative will be Ventseslav Assenov Dimitrov, and the choice of Yrena

Varadinova should not be recognized. It is even more illogical if it is announced

another that is in another, later place in the leaves because it remains. the question of whom
does he replace? If Irena Varadinova is illegally declared a national
representative, it is because she did not have the qualities of a candidate for the People's Party
representative. And I, DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, have I lost
In your opinion, your qualities as a candidate for MP? My place in
the list as a leader, by virtue of court decisions has not changed. And here it is
the essence of the dispute you have to resolve - WHAT IS LEGAL
POSITION.

It is obvious that the CC should seek answers to the following questions:

What if by negligence or negligence printed and distributed
the bulletin does not correspond to the registered list? The candidate in the list who is
missed in the ballot, will it be considered elected or not?

And what if maliciously by government agencies patronized with
the organization and conduct of elections, one candidate registered
regularly in the list, be replaced by another, with irregular registration? Can I
the first to be considered unelected and the second to be elected. Should it be flawed
the election and re-run or just a decision of the Constitutional Court in the case is sufficient, of course
proper referral? This is exactly the case at hand.

Can the one replaced in the ballot, but regularly registered in the list
candidate, to bear the negative consequences of malicious and illegal
actions of the executive branch, which does not comply with a series
decisions of YOU?

In addition to non-compliance with decisions of the SAC, the state authorities charged with
conduct the elections - CEC, DEC, district manager and Ministry of Interior, village
the deliberate compilation and distribution of the bulletin in accordance with
the leaves apparently committed a serious crime not only against
the unregistered candidate for MP, but also against the political ones
rights of all voters from 18 MIR Razgrad. More illegal
in this way they are prevented from exercising their right to vote freely.
(Consumed crimes under Articles 167, 1696 and 169c of the Penal Code). That's right

the ballot serves the particular voter to make his decision, to determine

his will and realize it with his vote. But what can a voter do,
when he does not see the name of the one who campaigned for one party or
coalition and is normally registered as a candidate?

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

It is on this issue that I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Republic
Bulgaria is a party to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
fundamental freedoms, ratified by the National Assembly on September 7, 1992. Protected under this
Convention on the Rights of Citizens includes the right to free elections - Article 3
of Protocol 1. This Convention forms part of our domestic law. This means that
under this article for their unprotected rights in our country not only 23 and some of my colleagues, but also
all voters from the 18th MIR Razgrad and Europe can seek protection in
European Court of Human Rights. Moreover, there is already such a precedent -
Matthews v. Britain, in which Britain was sentenced to
pay the applicant the sum of £ 45,000. Apart from that, there is also
precedent of a convicted state for non-compliance with a decision of the Supreme
administrative court - the case of Hornsby v. Greece, in which he participated as a judge
and one of you - Judge Dimitar Gochev.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

I want to assure you that as a longtime MP, as a member of
the official delegation at the accession of the Republic of Bulgaria to the Council of Europe, when
this Convention was signed as a member of the Joint Parliamentary
Committee Bulgaria-European Union during the 37th and 38th National Assembly, I have a hot
desire that the internal Bulgarian problems can be solved by ours
institutions. That is why I turn to the last resort in my case -
The Constitutional Court. But since I have always fought to protect the rights of
citizens in our country, and for the construction of a true rule of law in our country
European model, I declare to you that I will not hesitate in your negative for
me a decision on the case in question, in the name and to protect precisely this legal
country, I will turn to the European Court of Human Rights for justice.
Hopefully, however, this will not be done by the thousands of voters from the 18th MIR Razgrad and

Europe, because the financial burden on the country will be unbearable.

My relations are NMSS

From the very beginning I started an active campaign in 18 MIR Razgrad since
among all the candidates for MPs in the movement I have
greatest experience - I have successfully participated in 4 campaigns before
members of parliament. Without any structures with my fellow candidates quickly
we managed to create clubs in all municipalities and mobilize activists,
which is crucial for a campaign.

At 8.06, ie just a week before the end of the campaign we were with colleagues at
tour in the village of Tetovo at noon from journalists on the phone I learned about the receipt
NMSS,

signed by V. Draganova and T. Peykov. You can imagine how surprised

  

request to cancel my registration on request.

I have been, since so far no hint has been made by the movement
to me for something like that. NMSS did not inform me that it intended to withdraw
my candidacy, even less because of my past as an agent. I later realized
that NMSS had the list of those registered at the beginning of
the campaign! This, DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES, is inexplicable to

everyone familiar with the legal norms and procedures. First, because the publicity

 

the names of the files contradicts your constitutional decision,

 

secondly, because at the beginning of the campaign the decision in question 288 of the CEC
did not exist and in this sense there was no legal basis to
export and hold similar data. Not without significance is the fact that
the additional data that Tosho Peykov presents to RIK-Razgrad in order to
verify my agency history, are sent by fax to which the signatures of
The dossier commission is dated 04.06.2001 (with registration X013), and decision 288 of the CEC

was taken a day later. Where did the legal basis for this come from?

  

something? Finally, I will only remind you that CEC Decision 288 itself was promulgated
for null and void in this part of the SAC with decision 4270.

The natural conclusion to be drawn here is that NMSS had a list of
names of files filed much earlier than possible (how did this happen, obviously
is not the subject of the present case). For me as a candidate of NMSS, as a leader of

list is unacceptable, if they had my name, to qualify me

of an associate and therefore to withdraw me, but notice when - in the last possible
deadline for replacement of candidates. This is done or in order to use these
candidates until the last possible deadline to campaign for NMSS or with
in order for those same people not to be able to appeal against the decision to annul
registrations in the normal order.

Immediately after learning the request of NMSS to cancel my registration
I contacted the office of the leader of the movement Simeon II and asked
emergency meeting. It took place on the evening of the same date. I explained to him that it was
unconstitutionally and unlawfully to invoke the fact of
filing as evidence of cooperation or agency background, but I did not meet
counter-desire to correct the decision of NMSS. Still, he showed up
understanding of my intention to seek my rights to the end because it is affected
my good name in society. Later after the annulment of
Decision 288 of the CEC I sent a fax to Simeon II with a recommendation to withdraw
applications for cancellation of the registration of the registered, however again without
result. After the decisions of the SAC, it seems that the leader of NMSS has understood the mistake
of the movement, but did nothing to correct it,

The fax in question to RIK Razgrad has already become available to the media. I reached out
Prosecutor General's Office to establish whether a documentary crime has been committed
against an official (such as the candidate for MP). Many of
the attributes of this fax say just that. At first it consists of only 2
separate pages, the first of which concerns a completely different person -
Ventsislav Davidkov, featured in the report. On the second page is my name,
apparently pushed further and copied on a copier. Then
the signatures of 6 members of the Commission are visible. Two of them - E Dimitrov and M. Redzheb
however, they stated that such a document had not been issued and signed by them. However, it is clear
that some document has been issued to NMSS. After the date it says that the document is
issued in | copy and consists of one sheet. But the second sheet was faxed
separately. The document is therefore dissected, then forged with an insert
my name and finally sent by fax to RIK Razgrad. There are now three copies

and at the same time inauthentic! In REC Razgrad the document is shown to the members for

short time as a secret and the members were left with the impression that
the first page is about my "agency past." This is how it is announced
to all interested and spread by all mass media that I am
filed and therefore removed from the NMSS list. It is this way because
7 days before election day there is no other legal possibility to be removed from
leaves. Thus, the Decision of the Constitutional Court He10 / 97 was violated. Interestingly, the number of
the sending device is also forged - it is 3592 9814411. This is the number of
Center for mental and physical disabilities, where they claim they do not deal
with similar things and have never sent such a fax for which they have
confirmation from the post office. According to the chairman of REC Razgrad
the document was sent by fax from Tosho Peykov, who had submitted it earlier
the same day the application. These are the facts. This also applies to consumption
a crime under Chapter 9 as well as under Art. 167, 1696 and 169 of the Penal Code.

Naturally, the persons T. Peykov and V. Draganova were not fascinated by the fact
that the apparently forged document sent by them came to light. Yes
that they, insofar as they have important functions in the NMSS, and perhaps other persons who are
assisted them in carrying out this task, are interested in my removal
from NMSS at any cost. On the other hand, many people in NMSS already realize that
actions against me are actions against court decisions, against the law and
The Constitution, so maybe even now they prefer not to take anything
attitude. It is normal to assume that there are people inside the movement who are
they are afraid of my presence in the National Assembly and that their actions will be focused on this one
direction.

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

All my complaints, letters, objections and requests to RIK Razgrad, CEC, SAC and
now to the Constitutional Court in connection with the protection of my rights are
dictated not so much by my desire to necessarily be declared a people
representative. I've been like this long enough to think it's me
the only vocation in life. The problem is that while I was a candidate for the people
representative of NMSS and I actively participated in the election campaign of this

coalition through illegal and illegal actions by state

authorities (Dossier Commission and CEC) as well as from NMSS, I was
unjustly, unlawfully and unconstitutionally defamed, by
all the media I was declared a whistleblower, an agent of the State Security, with an agent's past,
"Reporter", collaborator, etc. without having a real legal opportunity
adequately defend against defamation. Ordinary people do not make a difference
between proven collaborators and registered, for them the hints in the media are
sufficient for the stigmatization of man and for his political, and which is more
important - social marginalization. Hence my unwavering will
to defend my place in the lists as an elected MP, which will be
the first step in the direction of my defense. I'm just interested in how to
defend my name, honor and dignity, to which I am entitled under the Constitution
(art. 32, para 1), because this concerns not only me personally, my authoritarian and my future
life, but also that of my family members, my relatives, my relatives and
known for years to come. For this purpose, I count on your positive
decision, knowing full well that the law is on my side.

I am well aware that this whole exhibition would be
superfluous if in our country there was a body that could
made a state institution - the Central Electoral
commission to implement an effective decision of the Supreme
administrative court and declare me elected people's
representative. I hope that the Constitutional Court is this body.

Attach:

1. Decision of the CEC He280 ​​of 01.06.2001

2. Letter from the Supreme Cassation Prosecutor's Office.

3. Interview of G. Tokin with KN Nakarov from "Trud" newspaper.
4

Copy of Certificate 013 from 04.05 this year of the Dossier Commission. <<