THE CO., DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,
a

C As a party to c.d. Me18 / 2000, formed at the request of 57
bettors from ХХХУ !! National Assembly to establish an anti-
constitutionality of the provisions of Art. 101 para. 1 and 5, Art. 102 para. 1, art. 104
al. Tichl. 109 para. 1 item 3 of the Medical Establishments Act, we believe that
the same is unfounded and should be rejected. The considerations
we have the following:

In accordance with the attacked art. 101 para. 1 of the PPA, the Minister of
the healthcare system transforms the existing public ones by an order
health care facilities, dispensaries and hospital
agnostic and medical structures at the higher medical schools in
educational establishments - sole proprietorships. To clarify the
In accordance with this provision, it is necessary to give a definition of
personal health facilities. Provisions from which such can be derived
treats exist in the Public Health Act:

- Health facilities in the sense of EPA are HEI and the National
public health centers; outpatient polyclinic
establishments, hospitals, sanatoriums and hospitals.
health and rehabilitation establishments established under the EPA until the
their development, closure or liquidation under the PPA. / 9 1 para.
1 ial. 2 of the Additional Provisions of EPA /

- Medical care in the country is provided by health
conducted under the EPA and by medical institutions under the EPA. / art. 1a para. 2 CEE /

- The health establishments are public / art. And al. 3 CEE /

- Public health establishments have a mixed form of financial
cheese:

"Art. 46 EPA: The budget of the public health institution is 06-
from subsidies from the republican and municipal budgets, revenues from
health insurance and cash payments, from own source revenues, donations
and other sources. "

- Health facilities established in the order of the already obsolete
EPAs are not divided into state or municipal depending on
to the property, and are defined as public.These public
health facilities must be brought into line with the new one
regulation provided by the PPA through transformation, closure or liquidation
early.

From the establishment of the EPA until its amendment in 1991,
only public health facilities in which citizens

their right to free medical care. With the amendment of
Art. 25 of EPA / SG no. 15/1991 / and the adoption of the new art. 25 a, is given
possibility to establish a private health institution, after permission
we from the Minister of Health. State health facilities
are established at the Ministry of Health, medical universities, people's councils,
Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Interior, General Directorate of Construction
troops. The health bodies and the establishment of the people's councils are
led by the Minister of Health. With the change of EPA with SG
no. 12 of 1997, healthcare facilities are now divided into public and
private and are defined as legal entities. A form of
financing of public health facilities with subsidies from the Republic
lycan and municipal budgets, as well as from other sources. / For
comparison: art. For - SG no. 70/1989, Art. 46 - SG no. 12/1997, amended DV
no. 70/1998 / Such form of financing is not inadmissible and not
contradicts the Municipal Property Act or the State Property Act
public property. The financing of public health institutions
on the one hand, and their significance in the system on the other
of health care, logically corresponds to the distribution of
ownership of capital and their management in the transformation
it them in commercial companies. In accordance with Art. 101 para. 1 of the PPL, pub-
personal healthcare facilities are transformed into le-
educational establishments - sole proprietorships with an order of
Minister of Health. In all existing public
health establishments, with the exception of those specified in Art. 101 para. 4 ial. Bot
LPH, with their transformation into medical institutions, the ownership of
their capital is acquired by the municipality on whose territories it is located
the registered office of the company and the rights are exercised by the
the municipal council. Public health establishments covered by
the provision of para. 5 are indicated in a list attached to the PPA and
brew at 26 regional centers in the country. The legislator, by law op-
shares that 51 percent of their ownership of the capital remains for
the state and are accordingly managed by the Minister of Health
net and 49 per cent of the capital remain for the municipalities in the district, whose
settlement the medical establishment serves. In view of the above,
there that in this case the right of the municipal councils not to be violated
dispose of their property as far as health is concerned
establishments that are not owned by the municipalities. Considering
the location and importance of these hospitals to serve the population.
from different municipalities, it cannot be assumed that there has been an
compliance with the principles of local self-government or that
of nationalization of municipal property in contradiction with the
the provisions of Art. 17 para. 5 of the Constitution ..

The arguments in connection with the provisions of Art. 102
al. 1 of the Health Insurance Act, concerning the existing public health establishments for
outpatient care.

In support of the above is the provision of p. 1 para. 2 of
EPA, the last sentence, which refers to the order of the EPA on
liquidation, transformation and closure of
health facilities in accordance with the Public Health Act. Raz-
the ordinance is from 1999 / SG no. 113 of 1999 / Given the
the order of p. 2 of the same law, / SG no. 12 of 1997 /, which states

that public health facilities within the meaning of the EPA are those that are
established by the Council of Ministers for the needs of public health
compliance, the logic of the legislation becomes clear. Obviously the new one
regulation is given by the PPA, and the changes in the EPA are for the purpose of synchronization of
the two laws, amending and bringing the obsolete regulation in line with
with the new relationship. Obviously, the goal is not nationalization, but
on the contrary, the aim is to strengthen the role of municipalities and decentralize
management. It is logical to do this with acts of executive
authority, in accordance with the legislation in force in the country. IN
in this sense, there is no contradiction between the attacked members and Art. 4
al. 1 art. 140 of the Constitution.

Health policy is of utmost importance for the country
as far as it directly affects the population, life and health of the nation. Responsible
responsibility for the general policy of the government
the President, and part of that policy is undoubtedly health policy.
for which the Minister of Health is directly responsible.
Not coincidentally, based on the understanding of the extreme importance
of the healthcare activity, the legislator provides the
Minister of Health and control functions, which are close
related to the responsibility arising from the leadership role it has
the same for the implementation of health policy. In this regard,
the above also applies to the provision of Art. 109 para. 1 item 3, in the attacked
part ‘after approval or on the proposal of the Minister of Health
preservation '. Here again there is a manifestation of the control function of mi-
the Minister of Health, logically related to the overall activity
health control, as an activity of exceptional
public interest and in which any reform must be
is done taking into account the immediate impact on
the population of the country. In this sense, we consider that there is no
in line with the European Charter of Local Self-Government.

In short, the health establishments established under the EPA are
public, with mixed funding. The medical establishments, according to the Health Insurance Act, are
already public, private or municipal, as in the case of hospitals in
the list under Art. 101 para. 5 of the PPA, the property is divided between
and the state. The transformation of the public health institution in
medical institution - a sole proprietorship, is made by the
of healthcare. With the transformation of public health
conducted outside the exceptions of para. 4 et al. 5 of Art. 101 LPH, property-
their capital is acquired by the municipality on whose territory they are located
locates the registered office of the company and the rights are exercised
by the respective municipal council. This is, in fact, the way to clearly define
municipal property.

With regard to the provision of Art. 104 of the PPL, we believe that it is not
person in conflict with the Constitution. The Constitution determines the
as public and private, as the regime of the objects of the state
and municipal property is determined by law, ie. is a matter of law
additional assessment. In this sense is also Decision Me 19 of the Constitutional
the court of 21.12.19993. The existence of a possible discrepancy between
legal provisions of individual laws must be removed
by legislative means.

In view of the above, we consider that the request for
declaring unconstitutional of Art. 101 para. You 5, art. 102 para. 1, art.
104 para. 1 art. 109 para. 1 item 3, in the part “after approval or upon proposed
the Minister of Health ”, from the Law on Medical Certificates
as well as for annulment of the acts of the Minister of
health care for the transformation of municipal health facilities,
are unfounded and should be rejected.