on constitutional case Mo 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

Pursuant to Art. 18, para. 2 of the Constitutional Court Act and
Order of the Constitutional Court of 13.02.2001, I express the following
opinion in connection with constitutional case Mo1 / 2001, instituted on
13.02.2001 at the request of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court under
the order of art. 150, para. 2 of the Constitution for> establishment of
unconstitutionality of the provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Law on
state property (promulgated, SG, issue 44 of 21 May 1996) due to
contradiction with art. 17, para. Zi B Art. 19 of the Constitution of the Republic
Bulgaria and for non-compliance of the same provision with Art. 1 of First
Additional Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Rights
freedom.

1. As grounds for establishing the unconstitutionality of
the above provision of the State Property Act in the request of Sh
Department of the Supreme Administrative Court alleges:

T. Contradiction with Art. 17, para. Zi 5 of the Constitution

The petitioner rightly claims that the right to private property is
inviolable, referring to the enduring practice of
The Constitutional Court under “ownership” should be meant by a more
broad term, "including all rights in the patrimony of a person."
The right to property should therefore be understood in a broad sense,
i.e. "Including other property rights." Should be considered,
that the provision in question applies equally to the property of
legal entities - individuals and legal entities, as well as private
state property.

The petitioner further wrongly claims that the provision of
Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Property Act is an action of
compulsory expropriation of private property within the meaning of Art. 17, para. 5
of the Constitution and Article 101 of the Property Act. The forced
expropriation is essentially an administrative activity carried out on
basis of the law, following the realization of a complex factual
composition, the elements of which are explicitly specified in the law. Art. 17, para. 5 from
The Constitution contains the principle of expropriation. IN
a number of regulations contain special provisions concerning
the right of the state in certain cases and preconditions to alienate
compulsory property of other legal entities - such are the provisions
of Chapter Three, Art. 32 - 42, of the State Property Act,
the provisions of Chapter Three of the Municipal Property Act, Part
fourth of the Spatial Planning Act, etc. In this case we do not have
fulfillment of the factual composition required for the institute of compulsory
alienation, even if we assume that alienation is possible. Neither
the reasons, nor the considerations, nor the purpose, nor the result of the legislative
activity is the creation of an act of expropriation, nor of expropriation
provision. Hence the lack of any grounds to seek justification
of the existence of a state need which cannot be satisfied under
otherwise, as well as advance and equivalent compensation
the legal framework, where there is talk of expropriation of property, is available
first of all: private property and private property outside of
state private property, ie cannot be expropriated private
state property. The procedure for changing the quality of a property from private
state property in public, and vice versa is regulated in the Law on
state property with explicit legal provisions. "As for
the possibility of expropriation - within the meaning of the law -
limited property rights, as well as other property rights, we can
assume that in addition to real estate ownership, can be
expropriated in accordance with the requirements of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution and others
property rights of legal entities in favor of the state. (Same
upholds the Constitutional Court in decision Mo 22 of 10.12.1996 under const.
Case Mo 24/96 “... a private claim may be ... declared for
state. It can be forcibly expropriated, but only under the conditions
of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution ... ”). Such alienation from others
property rights can be done only on the basis of a normative act where

to indicate the criteria for state, resp. municipal need that
it cannot be satisfied in any other way. Such a normative act concerning
other property rights, other than the right of ownership over real estate
real estate is currently missing in our law. Does not represent> more
its essence - such a norm and the provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Law
for state property.

With the amendments to the State Property Act of 1998 (SG, issue 124
of 1998) the provision of Art. 57 of the same law, which
allowed the District Governor to take away by right the right of
use established on real estate private state property, if
the need for the property disappears in the person of the user or the property becomes
necessary for another urgent state need. The provision was repealed with
right because it could be used to circumvent the law on
the constitutional requirements for expropriation of property rights,
perceived in a broader sense. In this case it was not about expropriation in
the legal meaning of this concept, and for a special order unilaterally
termination of the duration of the right of use in certain
prerequisites. The law also explicitly provided for a form of compensation for
proven damages.But such an expropriating norm does not represent and
the provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
property. It does not specify the actual composition required for compulsory
expropriation, neither the criteria for state need are substantiated, nor are
provides compensation because the norm has no such purpose. In essence
the norm is not alienable, but distributive, having retroactive
action in respect of existing legal relations and is not independent, ae
in direct relation to Art. 56, para. 1 of the State Property Act.
The petitioner himself claims that in this case we have no real coercion
expropriation of property or justification of such expropriation, but only
"Alienating effect". It needs to be clarified what needs to be understood
under the term “expropriation effect.” The effect of fulfilled on factual
composition of forced expropriation is the original acquisition of
owned by the state. The state can't do that either
forcibly expropriate ownership of its own real estate under
the meaning of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. As for whether she can
alienate a limited real right over his own property should be
answer as follows: this is possible, but only under the action of
a special law that justifies this possibility and the urgent need of
the State, which also provides for a duly equivalent and
advance compensation. In this case, however, we note once again that we are not
facing this case. One cannot speak of the "alienating effect" of
a norm which explicitly speaks only of the application of the law
established term. Even if the norm concerns existing legal relations and yes
reduces the term of use of the property, one cannot speak of “alienable
effect ", as this term has become necessary in our law. It is reduced
a term that is in principle a modality in a given
legal relationship and although essential for development
of this legal relationship, he does not exhaust it.

What has been said also concerns the issue of compensation. Provided that
we have no expropriation can not be asked the question of compensation
this ground. Compensation under our law follows either from the law or from
realization of the factual composition, containing culpable harmful behavior
and a harmful result between which there is a causal link. In this case
compensation cannot be claimed as the law does not provide for it and
because no harmful illegal action of
a state body acting in accordance with Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
property. Nor can a request for
mandatory> statutory> provision “ruling on compensation and
complementary to the action of Paragraph 6. The Constitution in two places speaks of
compensation: this is the case of Art. 17, para. 5, when we have the hypothesis of
forced expropriation and art. 7, concerning the responsibility of the state for
damages caused by illegal acts or actions of its bodies and
officials. Nowhere else in the constitutional provisions
a conclusion can be drawn in support of the claim that the State owes
compensation in all cases of settled or rearranged relations.
The issue of the obligation to return unduly duckling is quite another,
if any. In the present case, the State must repay the sums
prepaid for the right to use property established for more than ten
years from the date of return of the property or the order for
seizure. But in this direction is the overall practice of the Council of Ministers.

The issue of the request of the PP Department of the Supreme Administrative
a vessel must be placed entirely on the plane of admissibility
the opposite> effect of a legal norm affecting pending
legal relations.

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in Art. 5, para. 1 proclaims
the principle of non-retroactivity of criminal law. In his
decision Mo 9 of 20.06.1996. The Constitutional Court disseminated this
principle and for the tax legal norms, proceeding from the legality
of taxes, at the time of occurrence of the tax event. Although
in principle, the Constitutional Court excludes the possibility of retroactive effect
of substantive tax rules, in the same decision he admits it, with
consideration that this achieves a fair result. Art. 14 of the Law on
normative acts in principle allow the reverse effect of legal ones
norms, if it does not concern aggravation in the content of sanctions
provisions. The other requirement of the law is that the opposite action be explicit.

From the above we can conclude that there is no constitutional and
legal obstacle to the retroactive effect of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Act
for state property.

P. The contradiction with Art. Article 19 4, para. 1 of the Constitution.

The plaintiff justifies the impossibility of the retroactive effect of the norm
on the grounds that “through a special law economic relations are rearranged in
to the detriment of the constitutionally guaranteed rights of economic entities ”and that
thus the state influences the existing legal relations under which it is
country; and paragraph 6 of the TFP of the LSA is not only public

will of the state, but also its private will in its capacity and
to a party to an existing contract ” It is inadmissible to claim that the act of
The National Assembly, adopted in the manner prescribed by law, may represent
an act of private will. This is off a rpop as a feature of
the legislature. It is not taken into account that the state may act in
two qualities - in its capacity as a public body, through its bodies of
state power and administration and as a private legal entity entering the
equal principles in the private legal turnover. When the public authority of
the legislature enacts certain provisions concerning the private sector
legal relations, he of course refers to the state, but already in quality
and to a private legal entity. Of course, it is possible to rule
powers of relevant state bodies to be used
illegal in cases where only private matters
the legal will of the subjects and, accordingly, to be influenced by laws
unconstitutional on the private legal sphere, but this is not the case here
such. For example, the plaintiff on several occasions unreasonably refers to
decisions of the Constitutional Court in this sense. In support of its request,
he referred to decision Mo 17 of 16.12.1999. of the Constitutional Court,
where it is unequivocally stated that “interference in private legal relations is in
violation of art. 19, para. 1 and para. 2 of the Constitution, respectively
affirm the principle of free enterprise and guarantee
equal legal conditions for economic activity ... because it is interference in
legal relations between equal subjects, in which the state
it is simultaneously switched on and regulated in the way it considers
appropriate. " All this is true, but it concerns the state's attempt to
accommodates and regulates specific private legal relations. The last one
it is really unacceptable. In the case of constitutional case Mo1 / 2001 we do not have
something like that. The provision of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
property is a common and impersonal norm. It applies to an unlimited range
legal entities that it treats in the same way.

As regards the assertion that the provision of Paragraph 6
contradicts Art. 4, para. 1 of the Constitution on the grounds that it infringes
predictability of the rule of law and legal certainty in general, we want to
express our following opinion: Paragraph 6 is directly related to Art. 56, para.
1 of the law, which quite justifiably determines the maximum possible term
of the right of use on private state property. This norm
applies to all legal entities. This rule is of "general" or "public"
interest. State property, including private property, represents
national good, they are a treasure of public importance. For this and
there are special laws governing rights, orders and others
legal actions regarding state property. It is in this spirit and
the restrictive term of art. 56, para. 1. The norm of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the Law
for the state itself equalizes the position of legal entities in
its ability to be used equally and under equal conditions by
national goods - in this case private state property.
It is unfair and unjustified for certain legal entities to be able to
benefit from limited national goods to a greater extent and in more
long period of time at the expense of other entities, - precisely because of

the limitation of these goods - for which the law has ruled imperative
term of use.

In conclusion, we want to say that the norm of the law is of "general" or
"Public" interest, which protects goods from national and public
meaning that whenever we talk about "free business initiative" and
private legal interests, modern democratic, social and legal
state, adjusts the "collective interest". The principle of balance
between "private" and "collective" interest is at the core and spirit of ours
Constitution.

In resolving the issue of the unconstitutionality of Paragraph 6
of the TFP of the Property Act, the Constitutional Court must issue and
from understanding the appropriateness of your decision. We mean
the following: the norm of the law in question has been in force since 01.06.1996; such as
since then, many properties have been returned or confiscated under
the effect of the norm; they are accordingly provided for use under
the statutory order of other private legal entities or declared for
public state property. If the Constitutional Court rules
the unconstitutionality of the norm of Paragraph 6, this confronts
the same uncertainty the users of these properties have trusted
the law and we would certainly face a case of interference now
in the sphere of private law of the subjects of private law, who trust in c
the current legal order.

Our opinion "on the" request for "the establishment of
unconstitutionality of Paragraph 6 of the TFP of the State Act
ownership also applies to a finding of a conflict with paragraph 1 of
PDKPCHOS, as the provision in question was essentially repeated by
our Constitution in its part on the inviolability of the private
property. The peculiarities of the cited practice of the European Court are in
that it always refers to a specific legal relationship, resp.
legal relations with well-known parties, subject (s), rights and obligations. For
this is the W department of the Supreme Administrative Court was supposed to work
carefully, when through them he wanted to judge the action of the impersonal and
abstract legal norm.

I hope that with the above I contribute to the fair resolution of
dispute. :