OPINION
OF THE BULGARIAN HELSINKI COMMITTEE

on Constitutional Case Ho 10, 2001

In his request to the Constitutional Court under k. e. Ho 10/2001 group
MPs want to declare themselves unconstitutional
the provisions of art. 7, para 2 and of art. 76 of the newly adopted Law on the Election of
members of parliament. With these two provisions from the parties, coalitions and
independent applicants are required to pay for the printing of the complete set
ballots for the parliamentary elections. It is alleged that the landing of such
financial burden (BGN 100,000 for parties and coalitions and BGN 2,000 - 4,000 for
independent candidates) is impossible for small parties and independents
candidates, which would lead to their dropping out of the political process and, ultimately
after all, to deprive voters of the opportunity to exercise theirs
the right to prefer certain political messages. This, according to the request,
violates the provisions of Art. 421, art. 112, art. 6, para 2? and Article 4, paragraph 24 of
The Constitution.

1. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 42 of the Constitution

The provision of Art. 42 guarantees the right of citizens, with the exception
of those under the age of 18, those placed under guardianship and those suffering
imprisonment, to elect state and local authorities.
power and participate in referendums. There is no doubt that this right can
violated if, for one reason or another, the subjects of the political process,
parties, coalitions and independent candidates disappeared from the political.

1 Art. 42 of the Constitution reads: “(1) Citizens who have reached the age of 18, with the exception of.
those placed under guardianship and serving a sentence of imprisonment have the right to
elect state and local bodies and participate in public consultations.

(2) The organization and the procedure for holding elections and referendums shall be determined by law. ”
2 Art. Under the Constitution, insofar as the justification of the request alleges relevance to
the present case reads: “(1) The political life in the Republic of Bulgaria is based on
the principle of political pluralism ... (3) The parties shall promote the formation and expression of.
the political will of the citizens. The procedure for the formation and termination of political parties,
as well as the conditions for their activity shall be regulated by law. ”

3 Art. B, para. 2 of the Constitution reads: “All citizens are equal before the law. Not allowed
no restrictions on rights or privileges based on race, nationality, ethnicity
affiliation, gender, origin, religion, education, beliefs, political affiliation,
personal and social status or property status. "

4 Art. 4, para 2 of the Constitution reads: “The Republic of Bulgaria guarantees life, dignity and
the rights of the individual and creates conditions for the free development of man and of the civil
community."

 

stage or severely limited, to the point of depriving them of the opportunity to exercise
of political choice a large number of voters. There is also no doubt
that the imposition on parties, coalitions and independent voters of one
an unbearable financial burden would contribute to this.

In this regard, the Constitutional Court must carefully assess
the specific dimensions of the financial burden that the printing of ballots
at its own expense it would be for the parties. However, it should be noted that
participation in the political process is in principle costly
parties, coalitions and independent candidates. The election campaign ev
the essence of a political marketing, which, like any other marketing,
burdens financially political actors. We need money for travel expenses,
posters, radio and television advertising, rental of premises, etc. Without all this
it is difficult to imagine an adequate pre-election political event going
beyond simple media self - promotion for
satisfying one's own pride. The issue of coverage by the state and
those costs which are not currently covered may be placed on the same
manner and with the same persuasiveness as the issue of covering the costs of.
bulletins. The inability of parties, coalitions and independent candidates to
cover them is also able to remove them from the political process and yes.
restrict the political choice of Bulgarian citizens. However, you have to
noted that the financial support of parties, coalitions and independents
candidates comes from the state budget, that is, with the money that the state collects from
the voters themselves. It is clear that the parties, coalitions and independents
Applicants are interested in being financially supported, it is not clear whether and
the extent to which voters want to support political entities with questionable
viability.

The Law on the Election of Members of Parliament provides for others
restrictions on parties, coalitions and independent candidates. One such
a limitation is the electoral system itself. With Art. 6, para 3 of the Law for election of
MPs set a 4 percent barrier for parties such as
provided that they participate in the distribution of mandates. To overcome it
need to mobilize large human and financial resources. It's hard to
believe that a party or coalition that can not raise money to pay
ballots, will be able to overcome such a serious barrier whose
constitutionality is not disputed. With Art. 68 of the law, whose
constitutionality is not disputed, parties, coalitions and
the initiative committees to pay for the election broadcasts in Bulgaria
national television and the Bulgarian National Radio and their regional ones
centers at a rate set by the Council of Ministers. In regard to
the independent candidates with art. 46 of the law is required of independent candidates in
multi-member constituencies to secure the written support of
a certain number of voters. Recruitment is also required to recruit them
human and financial resources.

The assessment of the extent to which the state should support financially
parties, coalitions and independent candidates must balance between
guaranteeing the right of citizens to elect their representatives and its

an obligation to be a good manager and to spend the resources he or she has
disposal in the interest of the citizens. The latter obligation shall be imposed on
the state with a number of constitutional and legislative provisions. ? Maintenance
of this balance the Constitution leaves largely to the discretion of
legislator. There is no more specific instruction in this direction in Art. 42 or in others
constitutional texts.

Given the above, it is difficult to see a violation of this balance
requiring parties, coalitions and independent candidates to pay
the printing of the full set of ballots for the parliamentary elections.
Therefore, the provisions of Art. 7, para 2 and of art. 76 of
the newly adopted Law on the Election of Members of Parliament to be declared for
contrary to Art. 42 of the Constitution.

Q. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 11 of the Constitution

The provision of Art. 11, para. | requires political life in the Republic
Bulgaria to be based on the principle of political pluralism. On each
probability requirement parties, coalitions and independent candidates to.
pay their ballots would make it difficult or completely hinder participation
of some of them in the election campaign. The political process in each
however, a democratic society imposes certain restrictions on the political
choice of citizens. This stems from its very nature of a process in which
a large group of people, each with their own unique beliefs, choose another,
a smaller group of people to represent them. With this, the voters have to
to compromise and to judge against the background of the available alternatives.
The Law on the Election of Members of Parliament requires additional ones
restrictions, such as the 4% barrier, whose
constitutionality is not disputed. This further narrows the spectrum of
political alternatives and the need for voters to compromise.
The practice in modern democracies in this regard is diverse. In some
of which restrictions, including electoral barriers and requirements for
self-financing are even more restrictive. On the other hand, the Constitution does not
determines the minimum number of political entities without which to achieve
the principle of political pluralism would be violated. It is therefore difficult to
there is an encroachment on the principle of political pluralism, which
violates the provision of Art. 11, para. | of the Constitution and the adopted standards
of modern democratic societies.

Sh. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution
Art. 6, para 2 proclaims equality before the law and prohibits

discrimination based on wealth. First of all it should be
noted that Art. 6, para 2 proclaims the equality of the citizens before the law and

prohibits discrimination on the grounds provided for in the Constitution, under
attitude of the citizens. Decision He14 / 10.11.1992 of the Constitutional Court, p
which is interpreted this provision does not give reason to assume that the court is
tends to extend its scope to legal entities such as
represent political parties or associations of legal entities,
as the coalitions represent. But even if this were possible, it is not clear with
what the provisions of Art. 7, para. 2 art. 76 of the People's Election Act
representatives violate the principle of non - discrimination on the basis of
property status, as claimed in the request of the group of people
representatives. In this case there can be no direct discrimination as
the wording of both texts in the law applies to all parties, coalitions
and independent candidates, without reference to property status. The ban on
however, discrimination applies to both direct and indirect (indirect)
discrimination. Indirect discrimination consists in the different effect that one
a generally applicable rule may apply to different groups of citizens or
legal entities to which it applies. The ban of this kind
However, discrimination is a very delicate issue as a general theoretical,
as well as from an international legal point of view. In any case, this ban does not
implies a ban on some citizens or legal entities being poorer, a.
others - richer. There is a difference in property status between everyone
political parties, and covering the cost of ballots would be different
degree of burden for the different ones. But the Constitutional Court would go too far
far if he interprets this circumstance as contrary to the principle of
equality before the law and non-discrimination.

 

. Regarding the alleged contradiction with Art. 4, para. 2 of the Constitution

Art. 4, para. 2 requires the Republic of Bulgaria to create conditions for freedom
human development and civil society. This is one too general
a formulated provision that contains several terms that are not defined
neither in the Constitution nor in other laws. Their more precise definition probably
will reveal that in the Republic of Bulgaria there are laws and practices that
constitute an obstacle to human and civil free development
community. However, the refusal of the state to pay the ballots is unlikely
of parties, coalitions and independent candidates is the most serious of them.
Freedom and civil society can thrive in political systems,
in which all parties, coalitions and independent candidates pay their own
ballots and, conversely, be severely suppressed in systems that pay not only
the ballots, but also all other expenses for the "elections" of the candidates. Bright
An example of the latter was the political system of our country until recently
more than 11 years. At this point, the request of the group of MPs is
completely unfounded.

CONCLUSION: The request of the group of MPs to announce
the unconstitutionality of Art. 7, para. 2 and of Art. 76 of the Election Act
MPs should be rejected.


to
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

OPINION

from
The Council of Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria

on
constitutional case Ke 10 for 2001

DEAR MR. PRESIDENT,

DEAR MADAMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of April 19, 2001, we are
constituted as a stakeholder in a constitutional case Ke 10
for 2001, formed at the request of 61 MPs from the 38th
National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art.
7, para. 2 and Art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament
(зЗинП).

The request of the group of MPs claims that Art. 7,
al. 2 art. 76 of the ZINP, according to which the costs of production of
the ballots are at the expense of the parties, coalitions and
the independent candidates participating in the elections contradict Art. 42
and Art. 11 in connection with Art. 6, para. 2, Art. 4, para. 2 and the preamble of
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, taken in their mutual connection,
as they introduced a barrier to the exercise of both active and
of the passive suffrage of citizens depending on theirs
property status. This follows from the fact that the probable according to

the group of MPs amount required to participate in
elections would be “impossible for the participation of relatively small,
newly formed or simply poor parties ", as a result of which
their candidates were deprived of their passive suffrage, a
their supporters - from their active suffrage.

Indeed, as stated in the request, the Constitution is binding
the state by law and under conditions of equality before it to
guarantees not only the participation of eligible citizens, but also
the free formation and exercise of their political will.
However, this does not mean that the state is obliged to provide unconditionally
opportunity for anyone with the right to vote to be able to vote for
everyone who has the right to be elected. On the contrary, it means
only that the state must create equal and equal conditions
for all participants in the electoral process, guaranteeing freedom
exercising the right to vote and expressing the political will of
side of the electorate and the willingness to take responsibility for
the government of the country by political parties,
coalitions and independent candidates.

The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria does not contain a regulation
in connection with the organization and conduct of the elections, and shall be forwarded
to the law. Therefore, the power to establish a comprehensive regulation of
the organization and conduct of the elections, as follows from the explicit ones
texts of art. 42, para. 2, Art. 93, para. 1, art. 138, Art. 139, para. 1 of
The Constitution is given to the legislator. They are part of this system
and the conditions and requirements that must be met for registration
of candidates for participation in the elections. The constitutionality of
the requirements introduced by law should be assessed in the light of
constitutional principles and norms for political pluralism and
equality, but the specific content of the framework within
constitutional "requirements is a matter of" legislative
expediency.

In this case, the requirement to pay production costs
of ballots is only one of the requirements for political parties and
coalitions and independent candidates nominated by the initiative

committees for participation in the elections and it cannot be considered
separate from them. According to Art. 43 et seq. Of ZINP candidacies for popular
representatives can nominate political parties, coalitions and
initiative committees which meet the conditions laid down in
ZINP and in the Law on Political Parties, not every citizen who
has the right to choose. The PDO also sets deadlines and procedures,
which must be met in order for the candidates nominated by
parties, coalitions and initiative committees to take part in
elections.

The purpose of these legal requirements, which are not disputed by
group of MPs, is to provide an opportunity to participate in
the election of organizations and candidates who express the political
will of a sufficient number of voters and who are able to take over
responsibility for its possible participation in the government of the country.
The purpose of the requirement to pay the costs for
production of ballots by parties, coalitions and independents
candidates. That is why the meaning of this requirement can not
be defined as the introduction of a property qualification in contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as alleged in the group's request
people's> representatives. "On the contrary, it> guarantees that
political parties, coalitions and independent candidates are concerned
responsible for their participation in the elections and for their future in the future
participation in the governance of the country and are ready to share with
the state is responsible for conducting the elections by taking over
part of the costs for their own participation in them. There is no contradiction with
Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution, as on the one hand the addressee of
the obligation to pay the costs of production of
the ballots under Art. 7, para. 2 and under Art. 76 of the ZINP are not the citizens, but
political parties, coalitions and those supported by initiative parties
committees independent candidates, and on the other hand, this requirement applies to
equal degree for all participants in the elections who wish to
nominated candidates and does not create inequalities and privileges
only for some of them.

We do not share the opinion of the group of MPs that
thus limiting active and passive voting
right. On the contrary, this requirement, like all others provided in
legal requirements for parties, coalitions and initiative committees,
are aimed at protecting the right to vote. They defend
active suffrage because, on the one hand, they create guarantees
for voters that serious elections are allowed to participate in the elections
political formations and independent candidates who express
the political will of a sufficient number of voters, on the other hand,
limit the redistribution of votes to voters
to parties for which they have not been submitted, in the cases under Art. 108, para. 1 of
ZINP. They also defend passive suffrage as they create
guarantees for MP candidates that their
candidacies and political positions are supported by political
formations or by a sufficient number of voters with serious intentions
and real opportunities for participation in the governance of the country.

In this regard, it should be borne in mind that all others
costs of organizing and conducting the elections shall be borne by
the state budget, the main source of revenue for which are paid by
voters taxes. If the cost of producing the ballots does not
are taken over by parties, coalitions and independent candidates, the
in practice they will be borne by the voters. We do not consider all
voters should be required to pay to participate in
the election of organizations that do not have serious intentions and
opportunities for participation in the governance of the country and which in some
cases express mainly the leadership ambitions of their leaders, a
not the political will of the voters. After participating in the election
of political parties and coalitions and independent candidates is an expression
of their willingness to take responsibility for participating in
governance of the country, the right of the legislator is to ask them to
prove their responsible attitude towards the state and towards
the elections, bearing part of the costs of their participation.

The statement in the request that the determination of
the cost of printing the ballots shall be borne by

The Council of Ministers, without a legal framework. According to Art.
76, para. 3 of the ZINP, the Council of Ministers announces the costs for
the production of the ballots and does not determine them. Hence the law
authorizes the Council of Ministers only to disclose the actual ones
costs it will incur for the production of the ballots, a
their determination will be done by negotiating with the contractors at
the terms and conditions of the current legislation and in particular
under the terms and conditions of the Public Procurement Act.

In view of the above, we consider the request of the group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 7,
al. 2 and of art. 76 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament is
unfounded and should be rejected. 7