CENTRAL ELECTION COMMISSION

OPINION

Subject: Constitutional case Ho 13 of 3 July 2001 and
constitutional case Ho 14 of 5 July 2001 in a dispute over
the legality of the election of Irena Ivanova Marinova -
Varadinova - announced as an elected MP by
coalition "National Movement Simeon II" in the 18th
multi-member constituency - Razgrad of the produced
on June 17, 2001 elections for the XXXXH National Assembly

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

By order of the Constitutional Court of 9 July 2001
and an order of the Constitutional Court of 12 July 2001,
The Central Election Commission is constituted as
party to constitutional case Ho 13 of 3 July 2001 and
constitutional case Ho 14 of 5 July 2001

At its meeting of 23 July 2001,
The Central Election Commission discussed the sent by
letter Ho 13 / cd. 13/2001 of 13.07.2001 of the Chairman

of the Constitutional Court materials under c.d. 13/2001 and cd.
14/2001

The Central Election Commission considered | for
unfounded request of a group of MPs from
39th National Assembly and the request of the General Assembly of
judges of the Supreme Administrative Court for announcement
illegality of the election of Irena Ivanova Marinova -
Varadinova for MP from the National Coalition
Simeon II movement in the 18th multi-member election
district - Razgrad.

the requests argue that
the illegality of the choice is conditioned by
incorrect cancellation of Wenceslav's registration
Assenov Dimitrov as a candidate for MP in
the list of the NMSS coalition in the 18th MIR Razgrad with a decision of
The District Election Commission - Razgrad He 90 / 09.06.2001
year. RIK-Razgrad was filed against this decision
complaint from V. Dimitrov to the CEC and the latter left it without
consideration as inadmissible by decision Ho 330 / 13.06.2001.
The Central Election Commission shall support those set out in
this decision considerations that V. Dimitrov is not
legitimized under the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament
to appeal against a decision of a district election commission under
registration of the candidate list of the pre-election list
coalition.

Elections for the National Assembly are held on
proportional system with party electoral lists and
coalitions registered in multi-member constituencies
- Article b, paragraph | ZINP. According to Article 43, paragraph | by law candidates
for MPs are nominated by the parties or
coalitions and the registration of candidate lists
performed by the respective DEC at the request of the central
leadership of the party or coalition - art. 45, para 1, item 1
ZINP. These and other provisions of the law define as
participant in the electoral process political force - party or

coalition. Both her participation in the elections depends on her will,
as well as how many and which specific citizens will be
included in its candidate list and registered for
candidates for MPs. In the beginning, this will is
expresses with the proposal under art. 45 para. v.1 ZINP. The law
however, it also provided for the possibility of political force to
reassess and change your original will and ask
cancellation of the registration of a person from her candidate list
given data on his cooperation with the former State
security - art. 48, para 5 of ZINP. The purpose of is obvious
the legislator to protect the interests of the political force for
successful performance in the election process by securing
maximize her ability to rise as candidates for
MPs persons with indisputable morals and public
authority. The election process is a competition, understandable and
the aspiration of each of the participants in it to
achieve the maximum election result and a prerequisite for this
are the persons included in the candidate list and their personal ones
qualities. In these circumstances and considerations arising from
proportional elections, it is inadmissible for an individual to
imposes its will on the party or coalition to join
his in her candidate list. Such a person is not a participant in
the election process on its own grounds and is not
legitimized to "challenge" the actions of the electorate
administration - DEC and CEC.

It is also argued that by canceling
V. Dimitrov's registration violated the constitutional
his right to be elected a Member of Parliament - Art. 65, para.
1 of the Constitution. The OPPORTUNITY provided in the text
there is every Bulgarian citizen over the age of 21 who
has no other citizenship, is not placed under guardianship and is not
serves a sentence of imprisonment. To become
however, this possibility in PERSONAL RIGHT of a particular
citizen is a necessary act of personification, which is

left to the will of the political force only. By
In the opinion of Ventsislav Dimitrov, such an act is missing after
the request made by the NMSS coalition for annulment of
his registration.

Arguments have also been made for violating the law
due to cancellation of the registration of V. Dimitrov with
reference to Decision He 10 of the Constitutional Court of
September 22, 1997 in the constitutional case Ho 14/1997.
The arguments are untenable. The current norm of art. 48,
para 5 ZINP gives the right to the political subject to request
cancellation of the registration of a person from her candidate list
and at the same time within the period specified by law to request
registration of a new candidate for this position in the list.

The NMSS Coalition has exercised this legal right and
on this basis RIK-Razgrad has canceled the registration of
the candidate Ventsislav Dimitrov with his Decision Ho 90 from
09.06.2001, and with a separate decision it allowed
the registration of the new candidate nominated by the NMSS coalition -
Irena Varadinova, as this subsequent decision was not
appealed to the CEC. This decision to register Irena
Varadinova was not subject to inspection in the proceedings
according to adm. case 4806/2001 of the Supreme Administrative Court, on which administratively
case neither REC-Razgrad nor the interested parties -
NMSS coalition and the registered new candidate - Irena
Varadinova, participated.

In exercising its powers under Art. 45, para. 8
from ZINP the district election commission-Razgrad as
the registering authority was not empowered to assess whether
for Ventsislav Dimitrov there are data for cooperation with
the former DS, how these data are objectified and whether they
actually establish such cooperation. The judgment
for this it is given to the political force. For the purpose of

the legislator with the introduction of this text to be protected
the interests of the political formation as a participant in
the election “process, it is said> above. Namely> these
legislative considerations do not allow by analogy
the implementation of the decision of the Constitutional Court He 10/1997
accepted that the designation of a person as “full-time or
part-time employee ”of the former State Security follows
to be established with a report under Art. 6, para. 2 by the commission under art. 4
al. | on the basis of decisions of the commission under art. 4d, para from
The Law on Access to Documents of the Former State
security and former> Intelligence Management of
The General Staff. With the report under art. 6, para 2 of the law
reveal the names of persons with PROVEN
BELONGING to the former DS. This feature
however, it is radically different from the qualification given in Article 48,
para 5 ZINP - a person for whom DATA FOR
COOPERATION with the former DS.

The establishment of cooperation data is carried out
according to the procedures and through the ones indicated in art. 5 from
VAT and OTHER documents and materials. This establishment
only determines the content of public information
contained in the report under Art. 6, para. 2 of the same law.

In the cases under Art. 48, para. 5 ZINP the political force has
right to self - assessment of the findings of
Commission data on cooperation of one person with the former
State security. If such a conclusion is made and this
motivates her request to cancel the registration of one
person, there are no preconditions for discrediting his name in
society, because by dropping it off the candidate list,

the possibility for public announcement of his name is also eliminated -
Article 29, paragraph 2 of the ZINP.

The Central Election Commission "supports and
its opinion expressed in a cassation appeal of 19 June 2001,
that the judicial control over the final acts of the CEC under
Art. 24, para. 3 of the ZINP is inadmissible.

By decision Ho 340 / 16.06.2001, the CEC accepted that at
voting used printed ballots, independently
of the subsequent changes that occurred in the candidate lists.
The decision was not appealed and was binding on the participants in
the election process. Despite the existence of this decision CEC
made a check of the received election materials from
voting in 28 of the 44 polling stations in Europe, the results of which
are related to the result in the 18th multi-member election
district - Razgrad. It was found that everywhere voting,
which was conducted with the bulletin of the NMSS coalition, such as
leader of the list is Irena Varadinova.