OPINION

in constitutional case Me 18 of 2000

The Council of Ministers, taking advantage of the provided to him
possibility with the ruling of the Constitutional Court of 19 January 2001,
Expresses the following opinion in constitutional case Ke 18 of 2000:

The constitutional case was initiated at the request of a group of people
representatives to establish the unconstitutionality> of
the provisions of art. 101, para. You 5, art. 102, para. 1, art. 104, para. 1 and Art. 109, para. 1,
item 3 of the Medical Establishments Act, to establish the non-compliance of
Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the same law with an international agreement, under which the Republic
Bulgaria is a party, as well as to announce the acts of the Minister of
health care, which transforms municipal health facilities, for
insignificant. The request is for declaring unconstitutional
the provisions of art. 101, para. 1 and 5, Art. 102, para. 1, art. 104, para. 1 art. 109, para. 1,
item 3 of the Medical Establishments Act as contradictory to Art. 4, para. You
Art. 140 of the Constitution, but the petitioners argue that their
constitutionality as a contradiction with other constitutional principles and norms
the principle of local self - government, the principle of protection of
property and art. 17, para. 5. According to the applicants, the provision
of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 does not correspond to the principles of art. 4, items 2 and 4 of
The European Charter of Local Self - Government.

The Constitutional Court, by its ruling of 26 January 2001, is
admitted for consideration on the merits the request in the part for establishing the

unconstitutionality and non-compliance with an international treaty, but no

and the claim for annulment of acts of
Minister. In view of this, the Council of Ministers expressed an opinion on
essentially "only" regarding the "alleged" unconstitutionality and
non-compliance with an international treaty of the provisions of the Law on
medical institution, but not on the disputed reality of
the acts of the Minister of Health.

The examination of disputes concerning the legality of
the acts of the ministers is not within the competence of the Constitutional Court. From
one party, Art. 125, para. 2 of the Constitution explicitly provides that under these
Disputes are ruled by the Supreme Administrative Court. On the other hand,
Art. 149 of the Constitution nor does it provide for such a power for
The Constitutional Court does not allow it to be granted to him by law. Here
why art. 22, para. 3 of the Constitutional Court Act is not a ground on which
the requesting MPs may refer to the Constitutional Court
court with a question about the legality of acts of the Minister of
healthcare, with which he transforms healthcare facilities into commercial ones
companies.

The Council of Ministers considers that all requests for announcement of
unconstitutionality of provisions of the Medical Establishments Act
should be rejected as unfounded in view of the following
considerations:

1. In the first place, the request states that the provisions of Art. 101,
al. | and Art. 102, para. 1 authority of the Minister of Health to
transforms the existing public facilities for hospital and
outpatient care violates the guaranteed in Art. 140 of the Constitution

right of municipalities to property. The provisions provide for the disposal of

foreign property, which violates the constitutional principle of protection
of property.

The subject of this request are provisions for which the law
the envisaged possibility of application - until September 1, 2000, respectively until
March 1, 2000, ended at the time of their dispute before
The Constitutional Court. Even assuming that the deadlines in which
the Minister of Health was to exercise the power to
transforms existing public health facilities into commercial ones
companies are instructive, it should be borne in mind that the process of
conversion has already been completed, and with the exhaustion of opportunities for
application of the two legal norms has ended and their effect. that's why
we consider that the request to declare unconstitutional
the provisions of art. 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 1 should not be considered under
substance, and the constitutional case in this part should be terminated
due to the dropped subject of the attacked law.

In addition, the subject of the request are provisions whose
content is broader than the content that importers in
the circumstantial part of his request. Article 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 2
authorize the Minister of Health with the transformation of
all existing public health facilities for hospital and
outpatient care. A discrepancy should be found between
the will of the petitioners to be declared in the petitum
entirely for unconstitutional provisions of Art. 101, para 1 and Art. 102,
providing for the authority of the Minister of Health to
transforms all public health facilities, including those that
manage and administer state property, and set out in

the circumstantial part of the request their view of

unconstitutionality only in cases where this power is
provided as far as possible the transformation of public health facilities, which
manage and manage property - municipal property. Not only
the petitioners do not indicate, but there is none
constitutional and legal obstacle for the legislator to authorize the Minister of
healthcare to transform public health> facilities,
managing and managing state property, given that
the statement that the provisions of Art. 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 2 are entirely
unconstitutional, is unfounded.

The allegations themselves, with which in the circumstantial
part of the request argues the contradiction of Art. 107, para. You art. 102,
para 2 of the Law for the medical establishments with art. 140 of the Constitution. It is said,
that the legal provisions authorize the Minister of Health to
transforms municipal health facilities. It should be borne in mind that
our legislation not only at the time of the adoption of the Law on
medical institutions, but even before that did not know the status of municipal
hospital, respectively of the municipal polyclinic, even less differentiates
state health facilities and municipal health facilities based on
the different form of ownership - state or municipal, which is theirs
provided for management and administration. Until the amendments in 1997.
Art. 2 of the Public Health Act distinguishes public health
establishments at the Ministry of Health and state health
establishments to the people's councils, not state health establishments and
municipal health facilities. Effective at the time of entry into force
of the Medical Establishments Act, wording of Art. 2 also does not distinguish
public medical establishments, including those for which the new law in

Art. 101, para. You art. 102, para. 1 envisages transformation into medical establishments -

commercial companies, state and municipal, on the contrary - provides
all of them to be created, transformed and closed by the Council of Ministers.
Moreover, the need for coordination with the municipality in the establishment,
the transformation and closure of certain public health facilities is
provided not in view of the fact that she is the owner of the property to be
manages and manages the health facility, and given the
the health care provided by it mainly to the population of
the respective municipality, ie given the decentralized tasks in the municipality
on the implementation of the state function for health protection of

citizens.

The protection of the health of citizens is a function of the state,
assigned to her by Art. 52, para. 3 of the Constitution. The responsibility for hers
implementation is entirely the state, regardless of whether it is legislative
assigned to the municipalities separate tasks for its implementation. An important aspect of
this responsibility of the state is its responsibility for the overall provision
of the necessary network of health facilities for its citizens. As
the legislative decision before - the Council of Ministers to establish,
transforms and closes> public> health facilities, and
the legislative decision in art. 101, para. You art. 102, para. 1 are based on
the constitutional requirement of art. 52, para. 3 the state to provide protection to
the health of its citizens by providing appropriate to theirs
health needs network of medical institutions. The constitution outlines
the protection of the health of citizens as a public interest of the highest
order, which allows state regulation of public relations in
this area, including legislative restrictions on what is derived from
other constitutional principles and norms the right of municipalities to freely

manage and dispose of their property and freely to

develop a business initiative based on it. What's more, it's happening
issue of management and disposal of property on sites with
health purpose, which is largely transferred from
the state of the municipalities by virtue of 8 7, para. 1, item 6 of the Local Law
self-government and local administration in relation to decentralized
in them tasks for the implementation of the state function for protection of
the health of citizens. In principle, the performance of a public function is
grounds for establishing a public-law regime of the property with which
its implementation is ensured by the state and the municipalities.

The Law on Medical Establishments provides for a commercial company
limited liability company and joint stock company such as
the only legal forms in which the state and municipalities, implementing this
the constitutionally assigned function of protecting the health of citizens,
may organize medical activity (art. 36, para. 1, sentence two and art. 37,
al. 3). The new legislation requires bringing in the existing ones
public health facilities in accordance with it, ie their transformation
in limited liability companies or in joint stock companies
companies, or their closure (Art. 107). Article 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 1 by
essence do not create an opportunity for manifestations of free economic
initiative related to the disposal of property, and assign specific
legal action to bring it into line with the legal requirements of
the medical activity organized by the state and the municipalities. These actions
in particular to the Minister of Health with a view to
its capacity as a specialized body of executive power, which
conducts the state policy in the field of healthcare, as the goal is

through them to provide the necessary network of medical services for the country

establishments organized in the performance of the state function for protection of
the health of citizens.

Article 101, para. 1 and Art. 102, para. 1 not only find constitutional
support in Art. 52, para. 3, because the public interest protected by this norm by
the highest order and the public function assigned to it allow
legislative restriction of the constitutionally guaranteed right to
property of the municipalities. We consider the allegations themselves to be unfounded,
with which a direct contradiction of art. 101, para. 1 art. 102, para. 2 of
The Law on Medical Establishments with Art. 140 of the Constitution, as well as with
the constitutional principle of protection of property. Importers of
request maintain that in view of these constitutional provisions
only in the prerogatives of the municipal council should be
disposal of property - municipal property. As far as
The Constitution does not regulate the powers of the municipal council, including
those related to the exercise of the right of ownership of the municipality,
the petitioners argue the unconstitutionality of both
provisions as contrary to the applicable laws of the country, according to
which right of the municipal councils is to dispose of the property -
municipal property, including when they form or
transform into commercial companies (Art. 62, para. 2 of the Commercial Law).
At the same time, however, the legislation in this direction is not based
so much of Art. 17, para. 1 иЗичл. 140, and of another constitutional provision -
of Art. 17, para. 4 of the Constitution, according to which the regime of the objects of
municipal property is determined by law. The constitutional
legislator provides for the sites - state and municipal property,
separate regulation precisely because it considers that insofar as their purpose is

to ensure the performance of public functions, their regime in contrast

of the general regime of ownership may also include public law
elements. In this sense, Art. 101, para. 1 art. 102, para. 1 are provisions that
fit into the constitutional norm of Art. 17, para. 4.

2 Secondly, the request alleges that Art. 101, para. 5,
providing for shareholding of the state in commercial companies -
medical facilities for hospital care, essentially expropriating municipal
property in contradiction with art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. To be
supported by this claim, it should be established that the managed and
managed by public health establishments in accordance with the Annex to
Art. 101, para. 5 property is municipal property. Listed in the appendix
health facilities are all health facilities that have always served the population
of several municipalities - of all municipalities within the former district, and after
this - the area. For the properties managed and managed by them to
the moment of entry into force of the Local Self-Government Act and
the local administration was not present in respect of any municipality
the acquisition basis of 8 7, para. 1, item 6 of the same law, according to which in c
municipal property passes the state property - objects of the municipal
infrastructure of local importance, intended for health care.
In view of this, by virtue of the disputed as unconstitutional
provision does not expropriate municipal property as it actually is
the municipality does not have, on the contrary - the municipalities acquire property - joint stock
participation in the capital of commercial companies. As for herself
provision of art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution, which argues
contradiction, it does not refer to the forced expropriation of property
public legal entities, such as the state and municipalities. On the contrary, this one
provision is a constitutional ground for acquiring property from

the state and the municipalities. In this sense, the statement is not only untrue, but also

unfounded, because it maintains a contradiction with disproportionate to
municipalities constitutional norm.

3. Thirdly, according to the applicants, the provision of
Art. 104, para. 1, providing for the transfer of property - public state and
public municipal property, in the capital of commercial companies, and
the provision of art. 109, para. 1, item 3 in the part, envisaging the approval or
the proposal of the Minister of Health in decision-making
for privatization of medical institutions with municipal participation are also
unconstitutional. However, the petitioners do not substantiate their claims,
indicating the specific constitutional norm, the legal requirements of which
regulations violate. The request contains a statement of contradiction
of Art. 104, para. 1 with reasons to a decision of the Constitutional Court. It should be
noted that the cited opinion of the Constitutional Court referred to the objects
- exclusive state property according to art. 18 of the Constitution, among
which are not the objects with health purpose, ie in it can not be
find arguments to substantiate the specific claim for
unconstitutionality. The request also claims that Art. 104, para. 1
contradicts Art. 7, para. 2 of the Municipal Property Act and of Art. 7,
al. 1 of the State Property Act, and Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 - of the Law on
transformation and privatization of state and municipal enterprises such as
whole. It is further maintained that in so far as those provisions constitute
legal norms adopted in contradiction with the current legislation, they
violate the principle of the rule of law> state, which is why they are
unconstitutional. However, the contradiction between legal provisions
in itself, without their objective contradiction with
constitutional principle or norm cannot “justify

unconstitutionality .. We consider that any request to declare

unconstitutionality based only on argumentation, according to which
the second provision at the time of adoption is unconstitutional because
was adopted in contradiction with the constitutional principle of the rule of law, f
unreasonable.

The Council of Ministers considers that the request to establish
inconsistency with the provision of Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 with international
a contract to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party should be rejected
as unfounded. The petitioners maintain that the provision of
Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 does not correspond to the principles of art. 4, items 2 and 4 of
The European Charter of Local Self-Government, as it is
restrict municipal councils in exercising their competencies. This
statement is also unfounded, because it is in the second sentence of
the cited provision of Art. 4, item 4 of the international agreement is allowed
the possibility of limiting the powers of local authorities
self-government by another authority when it is within the law.

In view of the above considerations, the Council of Ministers
expresses an opinion according to which the provisions of Art. 101, para. You 5,
Art. 102, para. 1, art. 104, para. 1 and Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the Medical Act
establishments are constitutionally compliant, and Art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the same law -
corresponding to the principles of art. 4 of the European Charter for Local Governments
self-government, in view of which we find the request to declare
unconstitutionality and establishing non-compliance with international

a contract to which the Republic of Bulgaria is a party is unfounded.