Dissenting opinion of Judge Vasil Gotsev I signed the decision with a dissenting opinion on the following grounds. on the production of ballot papers not to be at the expense of the state budget and Article 76 of the same law, the provisions of which establish that these expenses should be paid by the political parties participating in the elections and independent candidates for MPs indicate that these legal texts contradict art. 42, art. 11 in connection with art. 6, para 2, art. 4, para 2 and the preamble of the Constitution. The decision of the Constitutional Court assumes that the contradictions are with art. 10 and art. 11 of it. The question of who should pay the expenses for the production of the ballots and that this should weigh on the state is not settled either in the preamble or in any of the be of the provisions of the Constitution. Article 42, paragraph 2 of it stipulates that the organization and procedure for holding elections and referendums shall be determined by law. Therefore, the Constitution has delegated to the legislator the right to determine how the elections will be organized and the procedure for their holding. In fact, the financial burden is not essentially part of the organization itself. And as I pointed out, there are no constitutional provisions for it. It is true that in the current practice of holding elections, the costs of preparing the ballots were borne by the state, but this was because the relevant laws did not provide otherwise. The challenged law does not violate any of the constitutional provisions, which are indicated both in the reasons of the decision and in the request addressed to the Constitutional Court. The preamble of the Constitution obviously does not contain provisions in this direction. The creation of a democratic, legal and social state, as proclaimed in this preamble, does not oblige it to pay the costs incurred by each party in participating in the elections. And the payment for printing the ballots is the smallest expense that the parties incur in connection with their participation. Article 6, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, to which the applicants refer, establishes the equality of citizens before the law and prohibits any privileges, including property status. Obviously it applies to individuals. There would be a contradiction with the provision if the law provided for the obligation to pay the costs of producing the ballots only for some of the independent candidates. However, the law obliges all those who participate in the elections to bear these costs. It is true that some parties have greater and others smaller financial opportunities. But in order to allow everyone to participate, it is unacceptable to create a rule for the state to pay only those who have fewer opportunities and to leave the parties with greater opportunities to pay for their own ballots. The impugned provision establishes equality for all parties and independent candidates. Article 4 para. 2 of the Constitution, to which the petitioners refer, also does not create an obligation for the state to bear all election costs and in particular the costs of ballot production. Its obligation to create conditions for the free development of man and civil society is fulfilled through the creation of legislation and its implementation, which would allow for free will and participation in the structures of society. However, they do not go so far as to finance each of these structures. It has nothing to do with the attacked provisions of the Law on the Election of Members of Parliament and Article 10 of the Constitution, on which the constitutional decision is based. The raised principle of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot applies to active suffrage, to the right to vote. The text has its historical origins and its meaning is that all citizens of a country who have reached a certain physical and spiritual maturity, who are not legally deprived of the right to vote, have the right to vote. Each of them has one voice to speak directly and personally, not through a representative, and to give it secretly. The text does not even affect who has the right to be elected. The passive suffrage is defined in Article 42, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and here the claimants wrongly claim that it has been violated. Paragraph 1 defines the circle of citizens who can be elected, and paragraph 2, as I have already indicated, provides for the organization and procedure for holding elections to be determined by law. Here, too, the constitutional legislator does not speak about the obligations of the state in connection with the costs of holding elections. It is wrongly stated in the decision that the political pluralism proclaimed in Article 11 of the Constitution is violated by the representatives. Pluralism is realized through the legal possibility of each of the parties to exist and participate in elections. However, there is no provision in the Constitution that obliges the state to provide economic conditions for the existence of as many parties as they wish to participate in political life. Even in countries where the state funds political parties for their existence or participation in elections, this does not apply to all existing parties, but only to some. Parties that are represented in parliament or that had at least a minimum percentage in previous elections are usually funded. In this sense are the directives on the financing of political parties, adopted by the European Commission for Democracy through Law in Venice.