OPINION

To the Committee on Health, Youth and Sport

SUBJECT: Ruling of the Constitutional Court of 18 January 2001, p
which the National Assembly was constituted as a party under K. D. M 18
of 2000 to establish> unconstitutionality and
non - compliance with the European Charter of Local Self - Government of
provisions of the Medical Establishments Act (promulgated, SG No. 62/99,
ed. and add., no. 88/99, 113/99, 36/2000 and 65/2000).

At its meeting held on 31 January 2001, the Commission on
health, youth and sports discussed sent with
order of the Speaker of the National Assembly He 150 - 01-24 /
24.01.2001 materials on K.D. X 18 of 2000

Members of the Commission, examining the arguments put forward in
request to the Constitutional Court, consider that they are unfounded under
the following considerations:

1> The Law on Medical Establishments (3LZ) provides
existing public health facilities for hospital care yes
be transformed into “medical establishments - sole proprietorships
companies ”, according to the provisions of art. 101, para. 1 of the PPL.
The transformation is carried out by order of the Minister of
health, providing that the ownership of capital
is acquired by the municipality on whose territory the seat is located

of the company, and the rights over it are exercised by
the respective municipal council (art. 101, para. 6). Only the status of
the considered public health establishments - they are transformed by
those supported by the budget, in companies whose capital is
municipal property.

2. This order for the transformation of public health facilities does not
contradicts the constitutional norm guaranteeing the right of
owned by the municipalities and does not violate the principles of local
self-government in so far as the powers relating to the
the transformation and closure of public health facilities always
belonged to the central executive, not to
municipal councils. According to the Public Health Act, competent
to make such decisions is the Council of Ministers, based on
proposal of the Minister of Health. It is in this order
the existing public health establishments have been established, which are subject to
of transformation in accordance with the provisions of the Medical Act
establishments.

3. The allegation that the act of transformation,
The Minister of Health "disposes" of a municipal one
property. It is explicitly provided both in the law and in the orders for
transformation that the sole owner of the capital is the municipality.
The Minister of Health does not change the holder of
ownership, but only changes the status of public health
establishment within its explicitly provided by law
competence.

4. For the purposes of health reform, the law provides rules for
establishment of “Medical establishments” with mixed participation - 51 90 state
and 4990 municipal. These rules do not contradict the Constitution,
because the powers of the local authorities are not taken away
self-government and their property rights are not affected.

5. Regarding the statement that art. 109, para. 1, item 3 of the PPA in the part “after
approval or on the proposal of the Minister of Health ”
contradicts the European Charter of Local Self-Government (ECHR),
we consider it unfounded, as the text of this international
act clearly states that “local governments
have full freedom to take the initiative within the law
on any matter not excluded from their competence or
delegated to another authority ”(Art. 4, item 2 of the ECMS).

Taking into account the above arguments and on the basis of
the debates held, the views expressed and what was done
vote, the Committee on Health, Youth and Sport by 10
the votes "for", 3 "against" and without "abstentions" took the following

ANSWER:

The request to declare it unconstitutional and inconsistent
of the European Charter of Local Self - Government
Art. 101, para and 5, Article 102, para. 1, art. 104, para and Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of
The law on medical establishments is unfounded and should not be

respected. A