OPINION

of the National Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria,
interested party in constitutional case 18/2000 on the list of
Constitutional Court of the Republic of Bulgaria

Honorable Constitutional Judges,

In connection with the ruling provided to us by the Constitutional Court by
January 18, 2001 opportunity, we express an opinion on a constitutional case
Xe18 / 2000, formed at the request of a group of MPs from XXXUSH
National Assembly to declare the provisions of
Article 101, para. and 5, art. 102, para 1, art. 104, para | and Art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after
approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the Law on
the medical establishments (Promulgated, SG, issue 62/1999, amended and supplemented, SG No. 88 and 113/1999,
No. 36 and 65/2000) and the inconsistency of Art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after
approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the same law
with the European Charter of Local Self-Government (promulgated SG, issue 46/2000).

By upholding in principle the considerations of unconstitutionality of
the above texts and the legal arguments attached to them, the National
Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria expresses the following reasons in support of
the request of a group of MPs:

1. Poal. 1 ial. 5 of Art. 101 от3ЛЗ

1.1. Poal. 1

The transformation of the existing public health facilities into a hospital
assistance - the regional hospitals in the sense of art. 9, para. 3, vol. | from LPH and
dispensaries - in sole proprietorships by order of the Minister of
The healthcare is in contradiction with art. 17, para. 1 ial. 4, Art. Article 19 106 from
The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Considerations:

is the Regional Hospitals within the meaning of Art. 9, para. 3, vol. | from LPH, are public
municipal property, according to 4. 7 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of
The Law on Local Self-Government and Local Administration and Art. 2, para. 1, item bi
item 9 of the Municipal Property Act.

Art. 17, para. 1 of the Constitution guarantees and protects the right to property. C
the act of transformation into a commercial company of a legal entity by
non - owner of the property or its representative (in this case the Minister
acts on behalf of the Council of Ministers, which represents the executive
power of the State) intervenes in the regime of property and breaks down
- by virtue of the PPA - the constitutional guarantee and protection of the right of
property.

is In parallel with this, the provision of Art. 17, para. 4 of
The Constitution, as already with a separate law - the Law on Municipal Property
- the regime of municipal property has been determined. It is by virtue of
constitutional provision, the Municipal Property Act is special on
in respect of any other law concerning the management and disposal of
municipal property. In this sense, the provision of Art. 101, para. | from ZLZ is
unconstitutional, giving powers to dispose of municipal
property of an administrative body of the executive state power. On these
considerations, para. | of Art. 105 also contradicts Art. 106 of the Constitution of R.
Bulgaria.

is the contradiction of art. | of Art. 101 of the Law on Public Health with Art. 19 of the Constitution
expresses a violation of the constitutional guarantee, creating equal legal
business conditions of all legal entities and the prevention of
abuse of monopoly.

1.2. According to para. 5
There is a contradiction with Art. 17,

 

.Tial. 5 of the Constitution.

Considerations:

f. Even if it is assumed that with the inclusion of municipal property in the capital
of a commercial company there is a hypothesis of forced expropriation of
municipal property (which is inadmissible for public municipal property),
then this case is decided by other rules related to the replacement or
the gratuitous transfer of properties. In this sense, there is a contradiction with
Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution.

f The guaranteed constitutional right to property of
the municipalities with art. 17, para. | of the Constitution, as the provision of Art. 101, para. 5
unequivocally transfers municipal property to shareholder ownership
companies in which the municipality is not the sole owner of capital.

2. Poal. 1 of Art. 102 от3ЛЗ
The provision contradicts Art. 17, para. You art. 106 of the Constitution

Considerations:

is the existing public health facilities for outpatient care under
the meaning of Art. 8, item 2, letters “c” and “d” it. 3 of the PPA are municipal property,
according to Article 7 of the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Local Law
self-government and local administration and art. 2, para. 1, item bit. 9 of the Law on
municipal property.

There is a contradiction with art. 17, para. of the Constitution for reasons
set out in item 1.1.

is Paragraph | of Art. 102 of the PPA gives powers to the Council of Ministers, c
the person of the Minister of Health to dispose of a municipal
property. There is a contradiction with Art. 106 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria,
which determines the powers of the Council of Ministers. Disposal of municipal
property is beyond these powers.

3. Poal. 1 of Art. 104 от3ЛЗ

The provision contradicts Art. 17, para. | ial. 4 of the Constitution.

Considerations:

Transformation of property from municipal to private - property
of a commercial company - an incompetent body, ie from non - owner of
the property to be transferred. In addition to infringing the guaranteed rights of.
property with para. 1 of Art. 17 of the Constitution, this provision carries out
forced expropriation of property, which is not even for state and
municipal needs, as the property is included in the capital of a private company
subject - a commercial company. This factual situation cannot be reduced
and to the actual composition of the formation of a property company
municipal property, as it is not carried out by the competent body - municipal
advice.

4. Pot.Z of para. 1 of Art. 109 of 3LZ
The provision contradicts Art. 138 and Art. 140 and of Art. 17, para. 3 of
The Constitution.

The medical establishments with municipal participation, providing hospital care do not
are only the regional and inter-regional hospitals in which there is also state participation,
but also the hospital areas, which are entirely municipal property.

By virtue of the constitutional provision of Art. 138, local authority
self-government of the municipality is the municipal council. The municipality has its right to
property, which he uses in the interest of the territorial community, according to art.

140 of the Constitution, ie the municipal council is the body competent to take
decisions on the disposal of company property,
when he is the sole owner of the capital in it.

The principle of the inviolability of private property is also violated,
guaranteed by Art. 17, para. 3 of the Constitution. Once the municipal property
is included in the capital of a commercial company, even though it was its owner
the respective Bulgarian municipality, it already becomes the property of the commercial one
company, i.e. private property. In this sense, none other than the sole proprietor
owner of the capital can not make decisions on privatization - transactions with
company share - because the ownership of the property is already on the commercial
company - private property of a private legal entity.

The created complex factual composition of the decision for privatization
of shares of a commercial company with a sole owner of the capital in it -
the municipality - after approval or at the proposal of an administrative body of
the executive power - is in obvious and inadmissible contradiction not only with
the provisions of art. 138 and 140 of the Constitution, but also with the provisions of Art. 17, para.
Zichl. 19 of the Basic Law of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Honorable Constitutional Judges,

In view of the stated motives and in view of the considerations of a group of people
representatives, "please respect" the request for "announcement of
unconstitutionality of para. | ial. 5 of Art. 101, para. 1 of Art. 102, para. | of Art.
104, para. 1, item 3 of Art. 109 in the part “after approval or upon proposal of
the Minister of Health ”of the Medical Establishments Act (Promulgated, SG, iss.
62/1999, amended and ext. SG, no. 88 and 113/1999, no. 36 and 65/2000).

With your decision you will restore the constitutional principles of guarantee
and protection of property rights, the determination of the regime of the objects of
state and municipal property by law, to guarantee all legal
persons of equal legal conditions of economic activity and prevention of
abuse. with the monopoly, on the protection of the investments of the Bulgarians
citizens and legal entities, the right of the municipality to its property and the
the inviolability of private property.