Honorable gentlemen constitutional judges,

The organization of Bulgarian hunters and fishermen arises immediately
after the Liberation on the initiative of prominent Bulgarian Revivalists and
politicians, among whom stand out the names of Stefan Stambolov, Dimitar
Grekov, Dimitar Petkov, rightly called by Simeon Radev "builders
of modern Bulgaria ".

For more than a century, SLRB has existed and developed
as a democratic organization with a pronounced environmental character. Through
all this time the Union has upheld the democratic principles of its activity
and the regulation of the hunting business, the national character of the hunting movement. More with
its emergence became the initiator of the adoption of hunting legislation and all
legislative changes in the regime of the hunting economy after the Liberation
are associated with the name of the hunting organization. Therefore, the legal status of the Hunter
Union is the inalienable institution of all hunting laws in the recent history of
Bulgarian State.

With the restoration of democracy in Bulgaria, the Union adopted
the line of a radical and comprehensive renewal of a return to traditions and
the revival of its national and original character. In the complex and difficult

conditions for building a democratic society in our country SLRB seeks to
defend its place as an independent, non-political and patriotic organization,
which protects the conservation and sporting interests of its members,
recognizes and affirms the humane values ​​of modern civilization.

Unfortunately, these efforts and aspirations were not understood by some
politicians in the new conditions who adopted a line of destabilization and
liquidation of the hunting and fishing organization without complying with it
historical past and merits for the protection of wild fauna.

This is not the first time that the problems of the hunting organization have been raised
consideration before you, the representatives of the only institution in
the state that ensures the supremacy of the Constitution and the principle of
the separation of powers, as fundamental in building ours
country. As early as 1992, at the request of 51 MPs, it was
initiated constitutional case Mo 17/1992, which sought the annulment of
Art. 24 of the old Law on Hunting, which is the basis of the law
status of the Hunting Union. By ruling Mo 7 / 21.07.1992, the Constitutional Court
rejected that request as inadmissible and refused to examine it at
being.

In 1994, a group of MPs requested an interpretation from
The Constitutional Court of 6 3, para. | in connection with Art. 5, para. 2 of the Constitution,
accusing SLRB of monopolizing the right of association in a certain
sphere of activity. Constitutional case Ke 4/1994 was initiated, according to which
the court assessed its admissibility positively and examined it on the merits. IN
Decision Mo 10 / 06.10.1994, published in SG, no. 57/1994, you gave
a positive answer in two main directions: first it is not necessary
the possibility of association is necessarily provided for in "law or other
enactment. Citizens are free to determine the subject of the association and
the goals they set "; and secondly," It is possible to entrust the implementation of

certain state functions of citizens' associations ... and even
desirable - for example in the protection and reproduction of the environment ...

Those proclaimed by you with the cited decision are clear and definite
constitutional principles have been violated in the regulation of hunting
activity in the Law on Hunting and Game Protection - is manipulated and
restricts the right of association of citizens in Art. 29, 30, 31 and 32 of the same
law and take away all state functions of the hunting organization, as
introduces a state monopoly in the hunting industry - Art. 4 of ZLOD.

A third attempt was made in 1996 by a group of deputies in front of you for
instituting a constitutional case in which they attacked each other as unconstitutional
Tutorial Art. 6, 13, 24 of the repealed Hunting Act, but until the formation of
no constitutional case was reached as three of the signatories withdrew
their signatures and their number fell below the norm set in Art. 150 from
The Constitution.

Honorable gentlemen constitutional judges,

For the fourth time since the establishment of the Constitutional Court before you
raises the problem of assessing the constitutionality of legal
situations in the field of hunting. The difference from the other three cases
is that in the current case 70 MPs want your intervention to
the constitutional rights of the 220,000 members of our organization are protected
to associate freely and, according to the historical tradition, to
manage and protect game as a national treasure, as with an unfair
by law, these rights were taken away or unjustifiably restricted.

We fully share the conclusion of the deputies that Art. 4, para. 1 THIEF against-
contradicts a number of basic provisions of the Constitution. The first of these is
granting a monopoly position to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry,

by granting him exclusive and monopoly rights over the "organization of
hunting area, management of the hunting farm and the management of
the cited text is not only in gross and obvious contradiction with art. 19, para 1
of the Constitution, but breaks with the current legislative practice of centuries
action of the Hunting Union and its structures. All applicable laws until
have now assigned certain functions of the organization, the conditions for
management and protection of the game, which they have successfully performed and are
led to the preservation and enrichment of game stocks in Bulgaria.
Assigning these activities only to government officials from the Ministry of Agriculture and Food
The National Development Fund will nationalize this national wealth in contradiction with the declared one

and a policy of privatization of state property and
management of civil society organizations, such as the Union of Hunters and

fishermen in Bulgaria. It is obvious that with the criticized unconstitutional
provision (Art. 4, para. 1 ZLOD) establishes and aims at the nationalization of
game wealth, which is a national asset and generally nationalized
is inadmissible.

In this spirit are other provisions (Art. 14, Art. 15), through which all the basic
important activities in the future will be carried out only by government officials and
are a direct continuation of the proclaimed monopoly of Art. 4, para. 1. Therefore
The 70 MPs are quite right that its unconstitutional
calls into question the constitutionality of all texts,
accepted in fulfillment of the principles announced by him.

We cannot fail to point out, although the other texts are not disputed
by the deputies, except for art. Chapter 7 | that the State 's borrowing of
almost the entire perimeter of economic activity of its structures, in time,
when its policy is to get rid of all its uncharacteristic functions.

In clear contradiction with the constitutional provision of Art. 44, which
stipulates that Citizens are free to associate "are the accepted

redbi vchlchl. 29, 30, 31 and 5 EVIL. They withdraw the provision provided by the
freedom of association and determines how, with what types of associations and
in what terms the hunters can associate.

The centuries-old ones are purposefully and unjustifiably neglected
structures of the Hunting Organization with over 120,000 hunters and their established

traditions of game management, reproduction and protection, and c
these unconstitutional norms order the creation of new structures
"regional hunting associations and a national hunting association", which is in clear
contrary to the “free association of citizens” adopted by the Constitution
".

Nowhere in the newly created law is written and regulated legal succession.
of the centuries-old structures - hunting party, hunting company, Union
of hunters who have established their long existence through
public benefit and socially recognized activity. Deprivation of succession
of the newly created structures is clearly intended to be presented afterwards
claims to the property of the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria and
of hunting societies, which was created by generations of hunters and fishermen in
for more than a century. There were even intentions of the state
officials and politicians to sell the exhibits of the National Museum
of the hunting organization, among which are our world records and with that to be
encroach on our national hunting dignity.

There is no doubt, in our view, that, contrary to the Constitution,
classed by the newly adopted Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities
goal principles for the activities of civil associations is the provision of
Art. 31, para. 2 ZLOD, where it is explicitly written that the newly created structures
"regional hunting associations and the national hunting association
are without the right to conduct business. "This prohibition is contrary to
the constitutional norm incl. 19, art. 2 "The law creates and guarantees to

all citizens and legal entities have the same legal conditions for
lordly activity ... ".

Then on what grounds was this ban introduced in the law, yet
more that its importers are extremely aware that with the accumulated
financial resources from companies and firms, currently from ten
For decades, the national hunters ’organization has organized and
There are 28 hunting and fish farms in which they are bred and raised
and provide hunters and fishermen with thousands of pheasants, partridges, ducks,
fish - trout, carp and other species, which are free
enriches game and fish fauna without any involvement
the state in financing these activities. The huge ones
funds invested in them are not within the financial capabilities of which and
to be a separate association of hunters. It is obvious that with this staging in
The law aims to plunder these game and fish farms.
in favor of private and company interests.

The prohibitions established in ZLOD are also a constant contradiction with the new ones
provisions in the newly adopted Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities
purpose, where incl. 3, para. It is explicitly stated that "Legal entities
non-profit may carry out additional business
activity only if it is related to the subject of the main activity, for
which are registered ... In the same article of this special law raft. 2
it is ruled that "restrictions on activities and means ... may
to be determined only by law. ". This text speaks only of

"restrictions", but not for prohibitions.

Honorable gentlemen constitutional judges,

In view of the above, we definitely consider the translated
considerations and arguments for the unconstitutionality of the above

the request of the 70 MPs texts of the Hunting Act and
game conservation are sufficient and they should be repealed by
The Constitutional Court to enable an institution of
civil society, as represented by those organized in SLRB
hunters freely and legally continue to exist in
the formations - companies created by them more than a century ago
and companies, for the fulfillment of the noble public benefit goal -
production, protection and preservation of national wealth -
game and fish, and for the development of hunting.