OPINION

OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY
AND THE GROUND REFORM

THEREFORE: Order of the Constitutional Court of
22.02.2001 with attached request of a group of people
representatives, with which “the National Assembly is
constituted as a party under the Ministry of Defense Code 3/2001. for
establishing the “unconstitutionality 9 of
provisions of the Hunting and Game Protection Act / promulgated,
SG, issue 78 of 2000 /

DEAR PRESIDENT,

Pursuant to Order K 850-01-76 of 23.02.2001
I present the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Forestry
land reform on constitutional case M 3/2001, for
establishing the unconstitutionality of provisions of the Law
for hunting and game protection / promulgated, SG, issue 2000 of 2000 /, as well as
follows:

T Under the first paragraph of the request regarding: art. 1, the words
"protection and management of game".

Art. 1 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act lists
exhaustive public relations, which are subject to the law.
It is systematically incorrect and impossible in terms of
legislative technique in Art. 1 to be regulated
the interrelations between those listed in Art. | public relations.

In Part 3, para. 2 and 3 the legislator very clearly said that
game conservation and management are inextricably linked
activities and that "game conservation is a fundamental principle for
organization of the hunting area, management of the hunting farm,
game management and exercise of the right to hunt ”, as well as
that “Conservation includes protection, security and control activities
in game management ”.

Therefore, the claim of the petitioners that in Art. 1
the expression "conservation and management of game" is an alogism which
is not in accordance with the constitution and violates it is unfounded and
should be disregarded.

2. Regarding Art. 4 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act
VZLOD.

It is alleged that Art. 4 of ZLOD contradicts Art. 19, para. 2, Art.
5, para. | ichl. 4, para. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.

The claim is unfounded and should be left without
respect for the following reasons:

A / Art. 4 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 19, para. 2 of the CRB.
Art. 4 of ZLOD regulates the state assigned by law
functions of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry regarding
the organization of the hunting area, the management of the hunting area
farm and the control of game management, which is in
in unison with 6 12 of the TFP of the same law and a natural consequence of
the fact that the game is private state property.
Naturally the owner and no one but the owner in
the person of the state through the MAF to be obliged by law to
carries out the organization of the hunting area, the management of
hunting management and game management control.
Nowhere in Art. 4 of ZLOD is not an economic activity that yes
is carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry.

On the other hand, Art. 19, para. 2 of the CRB ”creates and guarantees to
all citizens and legal entities have the same legal conditions for
economic activity by> preventing> the abuse of
monopoly, unfair competition and consumer protection ”.
According to Art. 16, para. 1 of the Competition Protection Act:
"The position of an enterprise, which by law has one, is monopolistic

the exclusive right to carry out a certain type of business
activity ”. Therefore, Art. 4 of ZLOD, which does not regulate
the performance of economic activities is incompatible with Art. 19, para. 2
of the Constitution.

B / Art. 4 does not contradict art. 5, para. | from KRB.

The allegation that Art. 4 of ZLOD contradicts Art. 5, para. | from
The Constitution, because existing public ones were not regulated
relationship is unfounded, unsubstantiated, does not correspond to the spirit and
the content of the law and should also be disregarded under
the following considerations:

This statement does not indicate a specific contradiction
of Art. 4 of ZLOD with a constitutional text. The provision of Art. 5,
al. | of the Constitution establishes the supremacy of the Constitution
as a law and says that other laws cannot contradict it.
The general reference to the provision of Art. 5, para. | of the Constitution
does not lead to unconstitutionality of texts of individual laws.

The statement and the conclusion are insolvent and without legal value,
made by him that with the text of Art. 4 new public ones are created
relations that did not exist before the adoption of ZLOD,
which contradicted Art. 5, para. | of the Constitution. The acting
before ZLOD, Law on the Hunting Economy (repealed, SG, issue 78 of 2000
d.), provided a legal framework for identical public relations.
The adoption of the new Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria from 1991
imposed new principles in regulating the existing ones
public relations. This necessitated> the creation of a new one
regulations in the various spheres of public life, in this
number and change of the rights and obligations of the legal entities.

C / Art. 4 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 4, para. 2 of the CRB.

The claim that for a century the legal framework is unfounded
has assigned activities for the creation of hunting areas and
the management of the hunting farm of the public organization
of hunters.

In Chapter U "Supervision and regulation of the hunting economy", members
27 and 28 of the Hunting Act / prom. SG no. 252 of February 8, 1926 /
read: “Art. 27. The general supervision of the hunting economy in the Kingdom
belongs to the Ministry of Agriculture and State Property
and its bodies, which monitor the implementation of this
law"

“Art. 28 General measures for the regulation of hunting
farm in the Kingdom are made by the hunting council at
the forest and hunting department. The decisions of the hunting council are subject

of implementation after their approval by the Minister of Agriculture and
state property. ”

Art. 5 of the Hunting Economy Act / promulgated, SG, iss. 91 of
1982, amended no. 13/97 and no. 11/98 / reads: “The development and
the management of the hunting farm is carried out by the state ”

From the texts quoted above, it is established that it is indisputable
in such a way that the state has not been deprived of its basic functions,
arising from the principle that game is state property.
Therefore, the conclusion made by the group of MPs
made the request to declare unconstitutional
texts from ZLOD that Art. 4 of the same contradicts Art. 4, para. 2 of
The Constitution is unfounded and should be left without
respect. In fact, the rights of citizens are guaranteed, as
such as both the right to hunt and the management and use of
the game has been donated to the citizens according to art. 30 34 36 50 51
68 and others.

3. Regarding art. 7, para. Goth EVIL

Art. 7, para. 1 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 17 from
The Constitution for the following reasons.

From the interpretation of that provision and its systematic
place in Chapter Two, Section 1 "Organization of the hunting area", follows
the conclusion that the text “regardless of the fund boundaries and
ownership of land, forests and water areas ”is in connection with
an essentially purely technological distribution of hunting
area and the delineation of hunting areas. They are in this direction
and the following paragraphs of the attacked art. 7, para. 1 of ZLOD. Yes
for example, Art. 7, para. 5 regulates how the boundaries of
hunting economic regions - by permanent terrain forms and plantations,
compliant with the land boundaries. On the other hand, importers
of the request, do not take into account the public relations subject to
settlement by law - “property relations,
the protection and management of the game ......

The game is managed on a population basis. This
means that the game breeds and inhabits areas - forests, lands and
water areas, which include different types of property - private,
state, municipal.

In addition, the game migrates and cannot be fixed in
a specific area or region to search for a connection to
ownership of forests and lands. Outlining the boundaries of
hunting areas, there is no consequence of limiting
the right to property, much less its deprivation.

The legislator has taken into account that they fall within the boundaries of hunting areas
different type of property and for this, as a guarantee for the protection of
the right of ownership, has also introduced the provisions of Art. 38
“Construction of hunting facilities on lands and forests,
property of individuals and legal entities is carried out after
concluding a contract with them, in compliance with the requirements of
hunting management projects ”. Moreover, according to 9, items 5, 6. “6”
of the TFP of ZLOD, which creates a new para. 2 of Art. 95 of the Law on
forests / SG no. 78 of 2000 / explicitly provides for their provision
to the owners of forests and lands part of the funds raised by
fees under Art. 52 and 53 of ZLOD.

The statement that “... in a forest area - private
property, under a contract with the forestry will be accommodated
another private company that will manage the game and will
orders, restricting the rights of the private owner of
the forest ”because he is not the owner of the game. The state
forestries will grant only the right to
management of the game and those specified in Art. 34 of the law
subjects, as in Art. 36, para. 2 states that “the state
forestry ”provide game management in
the hunting economic regions, outside those under par. | and Art. 35 of the hunters
associations under Art. 30 by direct negotiation ”, which guarantees
the rights of the hunters themselves. The legislator has provided specific
terms and conditions for direct negotiation, as well as for conducting
competitions to determine the entity that will manage the game in
other cases.

They remain outside the subject of legal regulation with ZLOD
the right of ownership or limited real rights over the lands,
forests and water areas.

The provision of Art. 7, para. | in connection with its systematic
place in the law, as well as in connection with the circle of public relations,
subject to settlement with ZLOD, excludes the validity of
the request for unconstitutionality of the attacked text.

«S

4. Art. 29, 30 and 31 of ZLOD does not contradict Art. 44 from
The Constitution.

The petitioners claim that the above provisions
substantially restricted the right of association by taking it away
the right of association of 220,000 Bulgarian citizens, as well as that
the law prohibited associations from conducting business
activity.

This statement is absolutely unfounded in the following
considerations:

Art. 29 of ZLOD regulates the right of Bulgarian citizens,
acquired the right to hunt, to unite in a hunting party
(the latter is not a legal entity), in order to protect their interests
for management and protection of game in a hunting area.
The provision of Art. 30 further develops the idea by providing
the persons under art. 29 from neighboring hunting areas, in the area of
activity of one or several state forestries, to establish
hunting associations for the purpose of carrying out activities related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. They are registered under the Law on Persons and the Family - repealed.
in its part of art. 134-154 in SG, no. 81 of 2000, (in force
provisions at the time of entry into force of ZLOD). The text of
Art. 31 indicates that hunting associations Legal entities / may
establish on a voluntary basis regional hunting associations and
national hunting association, which are registered under the Law on
individuals and family - revoked in its part of art. 134-154 SG, no. 81 of
2000, but an act in force at the time of entry into force of ZLOD,
but without the right to conduct business.

Art. 29, 30 and 31 absolutely proclaim the right of
free association, therefore it cannot be assumed that
these provisions are in conflict with the constitutional ones
requirements for freedom of association. Restrictive on
with regard to the right of association as well as the exercise
the right to hunt, were the provisions of the repealed Hunting Act
farm, where the hunter could only be a citizen who
must be a member of one organization - the Union of Hunters and
fishermen in Bulgaria, and the right to hunt was mandatory
bound by the membership relationship with the Hunters' Union and
fishermen in the Republic of Bulgaria.

Art. 30, para. | of ZLOD explicitly provides that hunting
associations aim to carry out activities related to
reproduction, management, conservation and use of
game. There is no ban on doing business for them. Without
the right to carry out economic activity are the regional hunting ones
associations and the national hunting association.

The introduction by the legislator of a restriction on regional
and the national hunting associations to carry out economic activity is
a matter of legislative expediency.

Regional and national hunting associations are forms

of an association for which the legislator establishes

dispositiveness about their existence. They are assigned
representative, organizational, consultative, educational

and auxiliary functions. Regional hunting associations and
the national hunting association have nothing to do with
game management. The economic activity is carried out by
the hunters themselves in their associations under Art. 30 of ZLOD, where
this activity is actually performed. Otherwise, / as is
the request of the importers / in practice will be concentrated
business in the cap / regional and national
associations / s will in fact restrict or even deprive of the right to
economic activity the hunters themselves. This, by the way, was the practice of
a few years ago it had become the Hunting and Fishing Union
in practice in a commercial enterprise. To this kind of organization
importers are trying to push the legislation, which would
was a restoration of past and denied command-and-control
methods, rights and organizational forms.

It should be borne in mind that regional and national
hunting associations are associations of hunting associations under Art. 30 from
ZLOD, which are legal entities. That means it doesn't
infringe on the rights of hunters - individuals who are
unite in hunting associations under Art. 30. For these hunting associations
under Art. 30 the legislator does not introduce restrictions for the implementation of
economic activity.

The provision of Art. 44, para. 3 of the Constitution has provided
the right of the legislator, in his assessment of expediency
to determine the relations of the state with the associations, ie.
to give legal regulation of the type and nature of the performed
of which activity.

For the stated reasons the request for announcement
unconstitutionality of art. 29, 30 and 31 should also be
rejected.