TO
THE COURT OF CONSTITUTION
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

LAT PL ъ.
OF THE UNION OF EMPLOYERS IN BULGARIA

ON CONSTITUTIONAL CASE He 1/2001

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In pursuance of the provision provided to us by 13
February 2001 under cd. He 1/2001 opportunity Management
Council of the Union of Employers in Bulgaria expresses the following
opinion on the issues raised before the Constitutional Court under
this case:

The Union of Employers in Bulgaria is non-governmental
voluntary non - profit association of the owners of
companies operating on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria. Wed.
its main objectives are the formulation of general opinions.
on the existing legal framework affecting business
activity and assistance for the development of favorable legal framework
for strengthening and development of economic activity.

In the light of these goals and in terms of its overall
activity for the Union are essential principled (constitutional)
basics of the legal order in general and of the legal regulation of the economic
activity in particular.

In this respect, the Union fully agrees with
the principle statement reflected in decision G 22 of 10 December
1996 on k. e. Ho 24/1996 (SG, issue 1 of 3 January 1997) of
The Constitutional Court, which reads as follows: "The principle of legal
country contained | art. 4, para. 1 of the Constitution besides everything
otherwise it means that the foundations of the legal order laid down in
Constitution, apply equally to the bodies of
the legislature, the executive and the judiciary, and for
all legal entities ".

The Constitutional Court has reaffirmed this statement in
decision Ho 17 of 16 December 1999 under c.d. He 14/1999 (SG, issue 113)
of 28 December 1999), stating further that “the interference in
private law relations is in violation of Art. 19, para. and 2 of
Constitution, which respectively affirm the principle of
free enterprise and guarantee a level playing field
for economic activity ”.

On the other hand, it is clear that the right to free business
initiative does not and cannot have the absolute character that freedom
of a business initiative does not preclude the need for any
degree of state regulation and state control over
economic activity. The Constitutional Court itself has repeatedly
set out the criteria for determining the possible limits of
state intervention. In that regard, we refer to Decision Xe 6
of 25 February 1997 under k, d.He 32/1996 (SG, issue 21 of 1997, С6.
ROX, 1997, p.46, on p.48), where the criteria in general and
the hypotheses provided for in the Constitution are formulated most fully.
In view of them, we assume that the legislative intervention carried out with
4 6 MANPADS, does not agree with any of these hypotheses, resp. is not
justified with a view to the protection of other constitutional values. No
it is such a value in itself - and not just because it is not
explicitly mentioned in this decision of the Constitutional Court -
state property as such (as opposed to public
property within the meaning of the 1971 Constitution, i.e. in another
socio-economic> system, “completely different from
established in Article 19 of the current Constitution). It's acceptable
(art. 17, para 4 of the Constitution) the regime of the objects of the state and
municipal property to be determined by law as it actually is
and the State Property Act itself, but as the state and
municipalities can also have private property, which for them
finds the opportunity to do business and be
participants in the civil turnover, the exercise of the right to
private property takes place under the conditions of equality of
all legal entities (decision Ho 19 of 21 December 1993 under c.
He 11/1993; SG, no. 4 of 1994).

It is also true from the case materials we have,
it can be concluded that the legal provision whose questions
constitutionality and compliance with an international treaty, under
which Republic of Bulgaria is a party, are referred to the
The Constitutional Court is applied on the occasion of> found
legal relations, one of the subjects of which is the state itself. This
circumstance at first glance expands the boundaries within

which the state is authorized to regulate the legal relations under
in a manner it deems appropriate. As a party in private law
relations, however, the state must act under the conditions of
equality, not as a holder of public authority, of
sovereign powers. The opposite would mean that it is permissible
the state "arbitrarily" determines the content of
the legal relationship to which it is a party. Like the Constitutional
court has emphasized (again peak He 17 under c. d. He 14/1999), although
occasion of a different hypothesis (in which the state is involved in
existing legal relationship between individuals), similar
an act of state intervention in a legal relationship that
presupposes equal subjects, by regulating it under
legislative path in a way it deems appropriate,
exceeds the constitutionally established and permissible limits of
state intervention.

If the legislator has any reasonable grounds to fix
the period for which the right of use may be established on
real estate - private state property, as he did
by establishing such a term in the provision of Art. 56, para 1 ZDS,
the same (possible) considerations are not equally valid in
resolving the issue of the existing legal relations they have for
its subject right of use, established in accordance with the established procedure before
the entry into force of the State Property Act, as it is
the purpose of the transitional provision of 6 6. Another issue is
that in terms of the content of the real right of use and
of its regulation in the Property Act, which applies and
regarding the right of use on state or municipal property
(Art. 62 of the Insurance Act), it is obvious that it is normally and usually established for
period, significantly longer than the one fixed in art. 56, para 1 of the LSA (idea,
which is the basis of Article 59 of the Insurance Act and finds expression in this provision).

However, the reasons for this are not entirely obvious
the authorization contained in the contested transitional provision.

The existing legal relations are based on an important one
premise, which consists in the fact that the other subject of
the legal relationship has relied on the existing legal framework and
acting at the beginning of the legal relationship. In case of
this order allowed a right of use to be established for
(significantly) longer period, of course, in his
determining in each case the private entity which
very often it is a business entity to take into account a number of circumstances,

which relate to the value of the established right (which in a number
cases is assigned for consideration), up to the amount of ‘investments,
necessary for the normal or specified in the constitutive act
use, the period of their return, etc.

The unilateral termination of the legal relationship by law,
which has as its object a ceded right of use, gives rise to
problems in two directions: a) the due compensation and 6) damage to
legal certainty.

It cannot be disputed that the effect of 6 6 MANPADS has
termination effect with regard to the right of use on
state property established before the entry into force of the Law on
state property, which occurs with the expiration of 10-
the annual term. In addition, this effect is alienating because
the length of the period for which the right of use was granted
established, is an essential element of its content, from
the material dimensions of its volume. By terminating
encroaches on the price paid (where the right is established for consideration),
on the incurred investment costs, on
investment intentions and expectations, etc. The application of
the term under Art. 56 para 1 of the LSA means that the holder of the right to
use is deprived of its possession.

As in the act by which the Constitutional Court was seised, it is
noted, the court firmly held that under> constitutional
the guaranteed and protected right to property must be understood
not only real property rights in the narrow sense, but as
covering other property rights. Gakova, as standing most
close in its content to the right of ownership, it is unconditionally
the limited real right of use. His injury,
therefore, it is admissible only under the conditions of art. 17, para 5 of
The Constitution.

Compulsory expropriation of property for state and
municipal needs is a last resort that can be implemented
only in compliance with the strict requirements of this
constitutional ”provision. "The latter is important
constitutional guarantee of the inviolability of the private
property established in art. 17, para. 3. The provision of 6 6 MANPADS
does not take any account of its expropriation consequences and of
this important constitutional constraint. It does not contain a way to
settlement of the consequences arising from the expropriation and under
the force of its action precludes the possibility of being determined
advance and equivalent compensation depending on
the specifics of each case. That is why its contradiction with
Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Constitution is obvious.

On the other hand, especially in view of the stated purpose of
Union related to the development of "favorable legal framework for
strengthening and development of economic activity ... ", we find that
provisions such as the impugned affect - given their
retroactive action - extremely negative of the legal
security. And the requirement for legal certainty that gives
opportunity for the legal (business) entity to comply with its own
conduct with existing legislation and provide
its consequences is an essential element of the principle of legal
country. From the point of view of this principle it is inadmissible to
affects a legal relationship in the establishment of which the party,
having the capacity of a private entity, has trusted
established order and has designed its behavior (including
economic) in view of a long period, as long before
the expiration of the agreed term by the state, through a law adopted by it,
puts an end to the legal relationship. There is, in this situation,
unconstitutionality and in view of the violation of Art. 4, para | from
The Constitution.

As regards the second ground of appeal
The Constitutional Court - under Art. 194, para. 1, item 4 of the Constitution, as
We accept the considerations set out in the request in relation to it,
finding that it leads to the result that also follows from the resolution
of the request for establishing unconstitutionality. In that
In this respect, we refer to the principled statement developed by
The Constitutional Court in decision He 2 of 18 February 1998 under c.d. Ho
evil ate ii pounds
according to "which" the interpretation of> the relevant provisions of
The constitution in the matter of human rights should be
in accordance with the interpretation of
the rules of ECHR ".

The request, as well as a number of other decisions of
The European Court of Human Rights goes beyond the understanding that
the notion of “possessions” within the meaning of Art.!, paragraph 1, para. | from
The Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights ia
human and fundamental freedoms has an autonomous meaning, encompasses
rights that are of a property nature and do not apply only to
real property rights in the narrow sense. And the alienation of
"property" without the payment of compensation corresponding to it
reasonable in its value, usually constitutes such an intervention by
country of the state in the exercise of what is stated in this
provision law, which can not be justified under Art. 1. С
in view of the above statement of principles set out in
solution Xe 2 pok.d. G 15/1997, for “conformal interpretation” of

The Constitution in the field of human rights the argumentation of
The European Court of Human Rights in relation to its interpretation
the application of art. of the Additional Protocol may be used
already in the substantiation of the unconstitutionality of 8 6
MANPADS in view of its contradiction with art. 17, para 3 and 5 of
The Constitution.

For these reasons, the Union of Employers in Bulgaria
takes the view that the request is well-founded and should be
be upheld on both grounds.