Dissenting opinion of Judge Rumen YankovThe dissenting opinion refers to Art. 3, para. 3, Art. 6d of the Law on Access to Documents of the Former State Security and the Former Intelligence Department of the General Staff (SG, DB 63). ., amended, issue 69/99 and issue 24/2001), as well as that the right to protection is not provided in the law. According to art. 3, para 3 of the VAT Act, Art. 3, para. 2, item 2 it is stated that they are not full-time or part-time associates of a certain category of persons, the disclosure of specific data or information about which will harm a specific interest, important for the national security of the country or endanger the life and personal freedom of an individual. The next paragraph 3 of Article 3 provides for the possibility of the names of the persons described in paragraph 2 of the same text to be announced regardless of the conditions specified therein, if they are registered as candidates in elections for President and Vice President, MPs or municipal councilors and mayors. Or the candidacy of the associates for participation in the elections is not a counter-motive for the fact that other people's interests may be affected. Thus formulated, the provision contradicts Article 28 of the Constitution - "Everyone has the right to life". The right to life belongs to the category of inalienable rights. Restrictions are inadmissible on any occasion. There is also a contradiction with Article 30 of the Constitution - "Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security." The right to personal liberty and security may be restricted under conditions and in accordance with the procedure established by law. It is obvious that according to the text there is a possibility for a third person to be deprived of liberty without the prerequisites for this. There is a contradiction with Article 41 of the Constitution - "Everyone has the right to seek, receive and impart information" of the hypothesis “specific interest, important for the national security” it should be borne in mind that the legislator in art. 3, para 3 has considered it acceptable to sacrifice security in the interest of the information of the society in the course of the election process. But the content of the provision of Article 41 of the Constitution is in the opposite sense - that the right to information must be limited so as not to affect national security. Contradiction of Article 6d of the ACSD with another Article 4, paragraph 1 of the ConstitutionArticle 6d of the law provides for the possibility of the persons whose names are included in the report under Art. 3, para 1, item 3 in contradiction with the law, to file against the commission under Art. 4, para 1 a claim for compensation under the Liability Act of the state for damages caused to citizens (ZODVPG). For its part, Article 1 of ZODVPG shows that the state is liable for damages to the affected individuals by illegal acts, actions or omissions of its bodies and officials during or on the occasion of performance of administrative activity. Liability can be sought, but only after the repeal of the acts in the appropriate order. And as it was said, with regard to the act of the commission under art. 4, para 1 no procedure is provided, through which to achieve its annulment. From this point of view, there will be a procedural obstacle to seeking compensation in court. Indeed, the text of the law provides in two cases that a direct action is admissible - if illegal actions or omissions are to be revoked, or the act of the administration is null and void. The report of the commission, which may affect rights and interests, cannot be qualified as an action (the law does not mean a legal but a factual action), the illegality of which should be brought directly before the courts. It is rare for a null and void administrative act to be directly assessed by a court. But even if this hypothesis is feasible, it will apply to a negligible number of cases. it can be seen that the provisions in the two laws contain contradictory provisions and do not regulate public relations without any problems. Such norms cannot be an attribute of the rule of law. The right to protection provided for in Article 56 and Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution has been violated. As a start, it should be noted that the right to protection against honor, dignity and the good name of the citizens, indicated in art. 32, para 1 of the Constitution, is preventive. This means that the person appointed as a full-time or part-time associate must be given the opportunity to initially challenge the findings of the commission under Article 4, paragraph 1 of the law. The scheme for disclosure of cooperation under the law can be summarized: of the data from the heads of the departments indicated in art. 4e the commission under art. 4, para 1 shall present to the commission under art. 4d, para 1 the data established for each of the referred persons under art. 5, para 2 or 3, and for the cases under art. 4e, para 3, item 2 and a proposal for disclosure of the name of the person. It is followed by a decision of the commission under Art. 4, para 2 for disclosure of the name of the full-time or part-time associate, but without his participation in both phases of the inspection. Indeed, an exception under Article 5, paragraph 3, item 6 is provided for non-staff associates, for whom the incriminating data are unconvincing, to be invited, but only if they agree, to sign a declaration that they have cooperated and to give written explanations. It can be seen that the participation of the affected person is not envisaged in the procedure, and insofar as it is provided, it is not to defend, but to make a possible confession serving the idea of ​​the law. The right to protection under Article 56 of the Constitution is defined repeatedly - the existence of a clear and simplified procedure in which those concerned can present factual and legal arguments. Along with it, the right to protection under Article 120, paragraph 2 of the Constitution as part of the general right to protection under Article 56 is also a fundamental constitutional right. If it is assumed that the act of the commission under Art. Moreover, not only is no protection provided, but any participation in the proceedings for the issuance of the act has been denied. In this case, no considerations of national security, infringement of foreign rights and interests of a higher order may be put forward, which would require the restriction of the right to defense. The reference in the judgment in the present case to the provision of Article 7 of the Constitution is an unconvincing argument, as it reproduces a basic principle and not a specific way of protection.