Dissenting opinion of Judge Rumen YankovAccording to Article 2, paragraph 1, item II of the Law on the State Budget of the Republic of Bulgaria for 2001 (SDBRB) for the Supreme Judicial Council (SJC). A similar problem was the subject of Interpretative Decision № 17 under c.d. № 13/1995. This requires that some of its reasons and operative part be reproduced verbatim: “The SJC, as a governing body of the judiciary, has a budget that is an integral part of the budget of the judiciary, but is independent of other budgets of the other judicial bodies of the same system ”. And more: “In principle, it is impossible to unite the budget with the budget of the body managed by it, ie. the body, the addressee of the administrative acts ”, taking into account in this case a court, a prosecutor's office and an investigation. The following is the interpretation that the SJC has an independent budget, which must be voted by the National Assembly in its entirety as the budget of a body of the judiciary. In addition, the refusal of the legislator to include in the current budget law for 1995 “on an independent basis (independent position) the budget of the SJC” was declared unconstitutional. The acts of interpretation are voluntary. They are embedded in the legal order and become part of it, binding not only the interested addressees, but also the body that issued them. Not only considerations of legal prestige, but mainly requirements for legal order and stability oblige the Constitutional Court to comply with its previous decision, insofar as there are no cardinal grounds to reassess the original opinion. Thus, the previous interpretation is not compliant, because with this decision the court rejects a similar request challenging a legal norm which still does not set a separate amount for the SJC's budget. In fact, a guarantee for the normal functioning not only of the SJC, but also of the judiciary as a whole has been denied. It should be borne in mind that the availability of funds for the SJC can be established and justified only by a statutory amount. Therefore, the reasoning of today's decision can not be accepted, containing the imaginary finding that the availability of funds "was evident from the will of the legislator in the adoption of the provision in question." Under Article 2, paragraph 2 of the LBRB, the provision is in the sense that a subsidy in the budget of the judiciary in the amount of 90% of the determined amount under para 1, as the remaining 10% shall be provided in case the budget deficit approved by art. 3, para 3 is not exceeded. The judiciary has an independent budget - art. .117, para 3 of the Constitution. As is accepted in all acts of the Constitutional Court regarding the budget of the judiciary, the annual budgets of the state must provide funds for the functioning of state institutions, including the bodies of the judiciary. Once voted, its independent budget implies non-interference by external bodies in all its phases. Obviously, the attacked norm affects the main one - the hatching phase. Specifically, the adopted in full amount of the budget in Article 1 of the law, which is assumed to meet the needs of the judiciary to the maximum extent, pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 2 is implemented in a reduced amount. In addition, its implementation is made dependent on the occurrence of the deferral condition - if the deficit provided for in Article 1, paragraph 3 at the end of the year is not exceeded. In practice, the disputed provision creates an opportunity to reduce the amounts for current maintenance of the judiciary throughout the year, as the amount of the annual deficit is obviously determined at the end of the year. Under Article 2, paragraph 8 of the Law on the Judiciary, the norm reads: the judiciary are housed in buildings owned by municipalities or the state, they do not pay rent. ”The provision contradicts Article 17, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, namely that the right to property and inheritance is guaranteed and protected by law and secondly. place that the municipality has its own property, which it uses in its own interest - Article 140 of the Constitution. There is no doubt that the law encroaches on one of the powers of the right of ownership - the use. In fact, municipalities are deprived of the opportunity to collect income from their own property. A burden has been created, which is unconstitutional. According to Article 10, paragraph 1 of the Law on Social Assistance, the text is in the sense that when compiling the municipal budgets for 2001, the amount of funds for social benefits under the Social Assistance Act and the Birth Promotion Decree cannot to be less than twice the amount of the targeted subsidies for social benefits provided by Art. 9, para 1. On the occasion of this provision it is imperative to take into account the norm of Art. 47, para 1 of the Constitution that along with The upbringing and upbringing of the children is supported by the state and art. 51, para 2, that the persons, temporarily left without work, have the right along with the social insurance and to social assistance. From the content of art. 10, para 1 ZUDBRB sees that additional financial obligations have been imposed on municipalities with the current budget law. However, the Constitution itself in Article 60 provides as the only possibility for imposing a property obligation in favor of the state budget the payment of taxes. In this case, the state transfers part of its social obligations provided for in the Constitution, but the municipalities. In this way, it is possible to transfer its obligations to other public entities through the arbitrary adoption of laws. The list identifies which extra-budgetary accounts continue to operate. Those not included in the list are ruled to have dropped the legal basis and the consequences referred to in the next § 10 apply. The possibility for extra-budgetary accounts and funds to exist is provided by the Municipal Budgets Act (SMA). Their management is carried out not by another, but by the bodies of local self-government - art. 31, para 1 of the Law on Local Self-Government. The importance of the municipal budgets has imposed the guarantee for their stability provided by law. Paragraph 2 of the RZZZOB states that its provisions may be amended, supplemented only by a special law or by the Law on the Structure of the State Budget. Obviously, this rule is not followed. In practice, without the order provided for in § 2, the rules of the structural law with another for the current year are repealed. The conclusion is that the provision of Art. 4, para 1 of the Constitution has not been complied with. This is because part of the extra-budgetary accounts according to Art. individuals and legal entities and organizations for the benefit of the municipalities. It encroaches on property, which is the property of the municipality, an action inadmissible in view of the provision of art. 17, para 5 of the basic law. § 20 of the Law on Municipalities para 2 of the State Budget Law: in the cases when the budgetary institutions, financed from the state budget, are housed in buildings owned by the municipalities, they should not pay rents. Therefore, the above art. 2, para 8 of the State Budget Law applies in full to the present case.