OPINION

of the Ministerial Council of the Republic of Bulgaria under
Constitutional case He 3 of 2001

SUBJECT: the request of 70 MPs from
ХХХуШ National Assembly for the establishment of
contrary to the constitutionality of Art. 4, Art. 7,
al. You art. 29, 30 and 381 of the Hunting Act
protection of wild boar (SG, issue 78 opa 2000)

Seventy people represented by ХХХУШГ Народно
Assembly requested the Op Consolation Council of the Republic
Bulgaria establishing a breakthroughConstitutionality of Art. 4,
Art. 7, para. 1, art. 29, 30 and 31 of the Law on Lobs for Game Protection (SG,
no. 78 of 2000 a.).

By order of the Conspiracy Court op 22 February
2001 on the Constitutional Case He 3 op 2001 Minister
Sowsh is Konshitpupran As a party to the case, Bub
Relationship with which we express the following opinion:

Under Art. 4 op ZLOD

The assertion of the group is unfounded and unmoved
folk "presented for" stitching 9
provision of Art. 4. Texts of art. 19, para. 2 op
of the Republic of Bulgaria proclaims the right to free business
initiative. It belongs, As bizar para. 2 of Art. 19, on bsichka.
citizens and legal entities engaged in business
activity. These people could have a monopoly position.
The state bodies do not carry out economic activity due to
Which cannot be said of “state monopoly

institution ”. With Art. 4 of ZLOD of the Ministry of Agriculture 1.

forests are assigned only authoritative functions in the organization
of the hunting area n management of the hunting farm p
Control over the management of the property, which are state-owned
function. C 1, w 1 of the Additional Provision is given
definition of the term “lobe economy” As a complex
activities related to the management, protection and use
of the game ... ”It is this Complex of activities that is managed by p
Controlled by the Ministry of Agriculture worse, and op
the definition of the term “management of dpbecha” (art. 338 opa
ZLOD) it is seen that "management of dpbecha" is not an element of opa
the right of ownership over the game per hour persons, and there is
nature of the implementation of the state policy 6 guards
area, which undoubtedly should be carried out op state
authority - the Ministry of Agriculture, through general authorities -
National Department of Pottery, State Sheep Breeding
stations in the breeding areas. To these bodies is ZLOD
Assigned KonKreshnai functions. No specific laws are indicated
texts from which it can be concluded that all activities -
the management of the hunting farm, spopanisbanesho of the game,
The control over the management, the organization of the hunting
area, will be carried out by the same “officials”. IN
different government agencies employ different employees.
The allegation that Art. 4 op ZLOD contradicts art. 5, para. 1
The constitution cannot be shared either. He didn't flinch
arguments for violating the supremacy of the Constitution
6 What is the contradiction of Art. 4 op ZLOD s
Constipation. It is not clear why it is claimed to be stitched.
"compulsory creation of public relations,
Which did not exist before. It is Art. 58, para. 1 op
The Constitution presupposes "coercion" by obliging the citizens
to observe and implement the Constitution of the Law. To

The adoption of ZLOD was not public relations

"Because they did not exist before" and were not settled
the amended Law on the Hunting Farm op 1982 for. He is not
reflected the changes that took place 6 socio-economic
Life in the country did not create an opportunity for development
free economic initiative does not guarantee
toat on the Control and protection of the game Kasho nationally
wealth, As a result of Koesho poaching has become 6
national problem, which led to a reduction in the number of p
endangering the gene pool, did not respect the changes in the forms
of property, as well as the constitutional right to free
association. In order to settle public relations 1
given 6 compliance with Constitutive principles 1 norm
of the Constitution of 1991, it was necessary to adopt a new one
Law for hunting.

It is also alleged that Art. 4 op ZLOD contradicts art. 4,
al. 2 og Konstishutsiasha, shi Kato did not guarantee free
development of civil society. On the contrary - a number
The repealed Law on the Hunting Farm
chaha of art. 4, para. 2 of the Constitution, as it was not allowed
structures civil society - non-profit associations,
to participate in the management of the frontier management areas. This
the right was given only to the Bulgarian Hunting and Fishing Union
(Which is an amateur, not a branch professional organization) for
all hunting areas 6 countries, except
the state forest phono. Only to this organization by law
was given the right to participate with a representative n 6 Hunting Council
(Article 14, paragraph 2).

The only non-governmental organization that
The Hunting Act gave the right to participate 6
conducting the state polispica 6 hunting area
economy and management, organize p

Coordinated the hunting industry.

Fisheries Union (BLRS) (Article 18, paragraph 2). Immediate protection of
the game, apart from the state authorities, ascended to the same
organization. The imposition of the sanction under Art. 22, para. 1 se
agreed again with BLRS. This legislative approach set 6
unequal position register under the Law on Persons 1
family non-profit associations and BLRS, and by restriction
the right to hunt only for the members of BLRS became meaningless
the establishment of PP membership in another association ”due to
the inability to exercise this right. It is this approach that
abandoned 8 EVIL, stabbed 00 limitation razvbitiesho of
civil society.

The law on hunting and conservation of upbecha specifies
activity, Copto can perform associations with poetic
purpose, and limits the state functions, which you say to be them
delegated, Shei Kasho cannot impose obligations on them
finance state activities with their own funds.
In this way, a balance is achieved between rights and obligations
them.

Under Art. 7, para. 1

It is alleged that the provision of Art. 7, para. 1 op ZLOD
proshpbvorechi to art. 17 op Konstishutsiasha, shi Kato limited
I make private owners of forests, As if without a will
their forests are locked 6 lobster economic areas.

Article 2 op ZLOD has declared the game 6 Republic of Bulgaria for
private state property, and para. 1 of Art. 3 defines ochbecha Kato
national wealth. The owner - the state, no doubt
must take all due care to protect
national wealth 6 interest of citizens in society.
The need to create an organization of the hunting area is
determines the need to preserve and enrich
grandfather diversity, improving the condition of

habitats, game reproduction, laundry

biological minimum, information on allowable stocks,
the rational and sustainable use of game. Zoning of
the territory of the foreigner for the needs described above is not
the only bid zoning of the sharishoria of the Republic
Bulgaria in itself does not presuppose the expression of the will of
Citizens are owners, especially since there is no legal text that
to restrict the rights of forest owners in a way that
Who will hinder their use. The constitutional
legislator has proclaimed the principle of inviolability of
private property, 6 Koisho, however, did not contain pdeyasha that no
exercise # can be restricted. A number of laws
contain various restrictions. Geh Repeganz - ZaKonash for
contains a chapter on property restrictions,
Providing that for public works purposes restrictions on
property is governed by separate laws, as it is
suitable 6 EVIL. Except shoVva as far as the owner
should draw a restriction (and on the basis of the fact that
the eyeball moves freely, independently), expressed
mainly 8 right of passage through his property, is carried out under
approved op minister of agriculture n worse pili op
the head of the regional department of burning plans. These
plans can be appealed against interested persons pro
conditions on the beam of the Administrative Act
production. A fine shall be issued in writing for conducting a fine
permit, which as an administrative aKSh can be
appealed. These are forms of defense against> unreasonable
restricting the rights of owners.

The question arises, which requires revocation of the right to
the private owner of the forests to declare them a protected area, yes
draw up its own management plan. Declaring protected
territorially regulated 6 chapters of the Law on

protected terishorich n is pre-stitched 8 Competence of

the Minister of Environment and Water, not the owners of
burns 1 land. In Art. 14 op Law on Protected Territories are
imposed restrictions on the sample of forest and land owners
8 zashshpenishe peritorish and this peKkssh is not obyaben for
protiKkonstsputsionny. There is no legal obstacle to the owner to
draw up your own game management plan if
he raises one, but not the game - owned by the state.

It is incorrectly assumed that 6 forest area - hourly
property under a contract with the state forestry, ”will
another private company settled down, which will manage the game ”and will
restricts the rights of the private owner. Article 34 op ZLOD
refers to the face, You manage the game, one op What is given with
general wording "oruvi legal entities". According to Art. 36, para. 1
from ZLOD to the shaky persons the management of the game is provided 6
orchard breeding sections through Competition. Requirements For persons 6
dependence on the necessity of performing the Specific
activities you will set yourself as conditions of the Competition in each
a separate case. Dibechovodishche sections are> differentiated 8
the boundaries of state forestry (art. 10 op ZLOD), a
the state forestries are bodies of the National Government
in the forests and carry out the management of the state forest background,
security and control on the pot and lands op forest background and
On burns created on lands and land phono (art. 22 124
of the Worse Act). Therefore, the game areas,
detached Within the boundaries of state forestry, are not
located in the forest - private property, and the hypothesis of
Art. 36 is not applicable for sewing, therefore does not limit the sample
of the private owner.

Under Art. 29, 30 131

We do not share the statement that Art. 29, 30 and 81 op ZLOD
contradict the proclaimed op. Art. 44 op Conspiracy prabo

of association, As n that the activity of

the current hunting association. We hear that the EVIL has strictly observed
the principle of the right of free association as opposed to op
the legal regulation of art. 24 of the amended Hunting Act
holding, which give the right to hunt only to members of the
BLRS. It is this six hundred stitches that you constitutionally limit
the right of assembly. This is unconstitutional
restriction was overcome by ZLOD, Like Bulgarian citizens
you can freely choose 8 What praborganizational
Structures to be based on the principle of voluntariness. The right
of free springing is not only guaranteed by Art. 29, 30 and 31 opa
ZLOD, but through the imperative provision of 8 3, para. 4 op
The transitional and final provisions of the law establish
prohibition of lobster associations under Art. 30 to refuse membership of
persons who have acquired the right to hunt. The right of free association is
protected and with the provision of 8 5 of the Transitional and final
provisions, which provides equal conditions for registration of
hunter associations.

It is unreasonably claimed that Art. 31, para, 2 of ZLOD
contradicts Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constituent Assembly. Restrictions on
Art. 31, para. 2 op ZLOD are 8 in unison with Art. 3, para. 2 op Law for
non-profit legal entities, which provides that
restrictions 6 the activity of non-profit legal entities
may be determined only by law, As done in Art. 31,
al. 2 op ZLOD. According to the Prince, the Law on Legal Entities with
non-profit purpose will allow you to wipe 6 limited cases
business activity subject to various other restrictions.
In addition, the principle of Art. 19, para. 2 of the Constitution is directed
To the economy of the Republic of Bulgaria - para. 1 of Art. 19, 1
the creation and ranking of equal probationary conditions for
economic activity should be provided before bsichKko of
business entities, not on the sheza, Koshsho are after all.

non-profit goals n tasks.

Postabenishe In Art. 29 and 30 requirements
activity of the association to be related to reproduction,
management, protection and use of the forest are in view
assisting the state 6 the implementation of these activities.
As a state function, and when these activities were carried out
As economic activity, ZLOD observes the principle of art. 19, para. 1 op.
Constitutionalist for the right to free economic initiative and no
restricts it by any legal norms.

In view of the above, we consider that the provisions of Art. 4,
Art. 7, para. And Art. 29, 30 131 of the Law on Hunting and Game Conservation
contradict the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria due to
Which the Constitutional Court should reject the request of
the group of folk ancestors to establish the mehnasha

protiVonKonstsputsionnost.