FROM THE UNION FOR NATURE PROTECTION
Sofia, 12 Hr. Belchev Str., Tel. 987 95 36

SUBJECT: LAW ON HUNTING AND CONSERVATION
(Promulgated in the State Gazette, issue 78/2000)

Mr President,

The Union for Nature Protection is a non-governmental environmental union
organization founded by patriotic Bulgarian scientists and specialists in 1928
year.

The main activity of the Union is the protection of flora, fauna and the whole
nature of the country. That is why we are particularly sensitive to
the adopted Law on Hunting and Game Protection. «

The Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria (SLRB) performs useful
activity for protection of the ecological balance between the game wealth from
on the one hand and the use of game by hunting on the other. More than a century
SLRB educates thousands of Bulgarians in love with native nature and Bulgaria. He
is strongly connected with the traditions and education of the people towards patriotism and
nature.

We believe that the adopted law will cause serious and irreparable damage
damage to biodiversity and the balance in nature that will result

in turn and to the violation of the ecological state of the environment in
the country.

Some may take advantage of the omissions in the Act
unscrupulous persons and formations for personal illegal benefit.

In connection with some of the unconstitutional provisions in the Law on
hunting and game conservation, we make a number of notes and express the following
position:

The legal provision of art. 4 para. from ZLOD is in clear contradiction with
Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria. It is also violated
a wonderful tradition, the Bulgarian hunters and fishermen, organized in SLRB
to take care of the preservation and enrichment of game species in
the country. In our opinion, the remaining of Art. 14 and Art. 15 is also inadmissible and unreasonable
of the Act, which should be repealed as undemocratic. The proposed
"Advisory body" and "Hunting Council" to it are administrative bodies,
which will be cumbersome and bureaucratic, made up of clean administrators.
In this way, a non-governmental organization is liquidated and created
state and administrative body. In our opinion, this is not in the spirit of
the democratic development of the country.

The provisions in Art. 29, 30 and 31 are also unconstitutional. With them
the established for many years structures of the hunting grounds are neglected
organizations in which hundreds of thousands of Bulgarians are members.

SLRB is the largest patriotic, environmental non-governmental organization
an organization that enjoys authority not only in Bulgaria but throughout
Europe. It is no coincidence that it was first adopted in similar European structures.

The adoption of this Law and its provisions lead to the factual
liquidation of SLRB. We ask why and who needs this?

In view of the above considerations, we offer to the Honorable
Constitutional Court to annul in the prescribed manner those texts of the Law on
hunting and game conservation, which are in sharp conflict with the Constitution
of the Republic of Bulgaria and limit the activity of the century-old public
a non - governmental organization of hunters and fishermen working actively for
breeding, reproduction and enrichment of the genetic fund of
game wealth and protection of native nature.