on

are and will OPINION

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE
vi a ON CONSTITUTIONAL CASE He 1/2001
»REGARDING:“ Request of a panel of the 3rd Division of the Supreme Administrative Court

to establish the unconstitutionality of 6 6 of the Transitional and
final provisions of the State Property Act and
its inconsistency with Art. | of the Additional Protocol to the

Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

DEAR CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

The case was initiated at the request of a panel of the Supreme Court
administrative court to establish the unconstitutionality of 6 6
of the TFP of the State Property Act / STA /, as the importers
point out reasons for contradiction of the provision with art. 4, para. 1, art. 17,
al. 3 ial. 5 and Art. 19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, as well as
its inconsistency with a generally accepted norm of international law.

With a ruling of 13.02.2001 on a constitutional case
Ho 1/2001, the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration under
essentially constituted the Minister of Finance as interested

party to the case.

In view of the opportunity given to me by the definition, I express
the following opinion:

1. The request to establish the unconstitutionality of
8 bot TFR of the State Property Act:

According to the challenged provision of the State Act
property for the established in the established order until the entry of the law in
force indefinitely or for more than 10 years the right of use applies
the term under art. 56, para. | - 10 years from the date of its establishment.
When the term has expired on the date of entry into force of the law, the property
shall be submitted within six months from the same date.

The request maintains that the cited provision is inadmissible
affects existing contractual relationships in which the state, such as
participant in the civil turnover, is obliged to act under the same legal
conditions with the other participants - citizens and legal entities, due to
which is a contradiction with Art. 19 of the Constitution. In his own way
content and purpose this norm is a "deliberate legislative act with
alienating effect ", inconsistent with the constitutional requirements for
conducting forced expropriation of private property for
state needs, due to which there is a contradiction with Art. 17, para. Zee
al. 5 of the Constitution. This "direct alienating effect" violates
the principle of separation of powers, as related to inadmissible
seizure by the National Assembly of functions of the executive branch.
The norm acts on already existing legal relations, party to
which the State itself, as a business entity, has entered into valid obligations,
therefore unilateral extrajudicial " termination of these
relations contradicts legal certainty - an element of
the content of the principle of the rule of law, proclaimed in Art. 4, para. 1

of the Constitution.

I do not share the “views of the applicants on the following
considerations:

The arguments set out in the request do not take into account the fact that the essence
of the challenged provision is to legally rearrange legal relations,
arising and settled under the repealed Constitution of
1971, as well as the one repealed by the State Property Act
Real Estate Ordinance, adopted in 1975. Another important argument
is the adoption of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria in 1991, which
in part 17, para. 4 refers to the regime of the objects of the state and
municipal property will be determined by law. It is
the constitutional basis for the adoption of the State Law
property, which enters into force on 01.06.1996 and is special
Act with respect to the Property Act, enacted in 1951. This
a new law contains a complete and different from the existing one
regulation of acquisition, management and disposal of real estate and
movables, state property. The legislator could not
fulfill the requirement of art. 17, para. 4 of the Constitution and to determine for c
future regime of state and municipal property, if
did not include in this regime the existing legal relations. It wouldn't be
possible legal relations arising and settled in accordance with
already repealed acts, not to undergo reorganization, only
because it is the constitutional obligation of the state to guarantee and
protects the inviolability of private property. Obligation of
the state is to protect all the fundamental constitutional rights of
citizens. There is no constitutional prohibition on the state giving up or not
restrict the exercise of its constitutional rights when it would
could affect the rights of others. To be considered unconstitutional and

any state interference with the right to property is inadmissible,

means to limit the right of the state to settle it at all or to
settle it in a way that would be acceptable only to certain legal entities
subjects, but not for society as a whole. As far as the Constitution
requires the state to guarantee and protect property rights and
declares private property inviolable, this also applies to
state property.

The legislator in settling the matter in a new way in
the field of property achieves a fair balance between interests
of the state and other legal entities in the exercise and protection.
of property rights. In order to ensure equality between
private property, regardless of its objects and subjects, he has canceled
the prohibition on the application of the acquisitive limitation period in respect of property -
private state and municipal property, including them in this order
again in the civil turnover. In view of the nature, purpose and
the status of public state and municipal property, the legislator is
ensure and guarantee its protection by removing it from civil circulation,
by excluding it from the objects of the acquisitive prescription. Taking into account
the peculiarities of the real right of use, as well as the impossibility of
the state owning the bare property to exercise its right to
claim, the legislator with 6 6 creates a mechanism to
prevent the acquisition of state and municipal property
properties from third parties for the existing legal relations.

The allegation in the request that the challenged provision of 8 6 targets
expropriation of the existing real rights is insolvent. Alienation
implies a change in the nature and type of ownership, and leads to
the need to pay equivalent compensation, in execution
of Art. 17, para. 5 of the Constitution. In case of established real right of use

on state property after the application of 8 6 there is no change of

property. In any case, the holder of the terminated right of
use has the possibility to file a claim for compensation under
court order. The essence of the provision of 6 6 is determined by
its systematic place in the law and the intended legal consequences that it
settles. Obviously, it is intended solely for
the existing legal relations. With 6 6 the legislator aims to settle
legal relations in view of the quality of the object of the right of use -
state property and not in view of the subject - the holder of the right to
use. The right of use is a real right over another's property, for which in
Art. 59 of the Property Act provides for the possibility of
time limit. The right to property is an absolutely real right
and establishing a right of use, the owner is deprived of a definite
its power with respect to the exercise of property. IN
in this case, the right of use should not be linked only to
the implementation of economic activity. Without the provision of 8 6 it would be
not applicable para. | of Art. 56 of the LSA, in view of the requirement that the state
exercises its right of ownership over real estate at
the conditions and the order provided by this law, regardless of
the circumstance whether the right of ownership has been acquired by the state
before or after the entry into force of the law, according to the provision of art. 9
from ZDS. The effect of the provision of art. 9 of the LSA is unthinkable without
the rearrangement of the existing legal relations in accordance with the new ones
conditions referred to in the law. In this case, the new is normative -
the established term for the right of use. Assuming that the right of
state property cannot be restricted and established for
indefinitely, the legislator has introduced the term under Art. 56, para. | from ZDS.
It accepts that that time - limit must also apply to

the indefinite or for more than 10 years established by the state right to

use, as the preservation of an indefinite real right in
the existing legislation before the adoption of the Law on
state property would force the state to tolerate restrictions
of its own right of use. By rearranging his relationship with
affected persons, the State shall, on the one hand, recognize the existence of
their rights, and on the other hand with the norm of 6 6 brings them in
compliance with the rights of all others under the LSA to ensure equal
legal conditions for the use of state property. The legislator
whenever it determines the conditions and restrictions within which
develops a type of legal relationship, should enable in
a certain term for the existing relations to be rearranged in
compliance with the new legal conditions. It would be inadmissible to find
legal relations to determine legal conditions other than those introduced
with the law, because it is in such a case that it can be maintained
opinion that the rule of law proclaimed in
Art. 4, para. | of the Constitution. It is a matter of legal technique to determine
the manner of impact of the public law norms adopted by the LDA,
on the existing legal relations.

In view of the above, I consider the legal certainty as
necessary element of the rule of law is not violated by the disputed
provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the LSA, which does not limit the right to defense
of the persons concerned.

P. The request for a finding of non-compliance with 6 6 of
The transitional and final provisions of the State Act
property with art. 1 of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on

protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms:

I am of the opinion that that provision does not contradict
generally accepted norms of international law, setting out the following
considerations:

According to Art. 1 of the Additional Protocol any physical or
a legal entity has the right to peacefully use its property.
No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the interests of
society and in accordance with the conditions provided by law and in general
principles of international law. Transitional provisions do not
in no way infringe the right of States to introduce such
laws they deem necessary for the exercise of control
on the use of the property in accordance with the general interest or for
ensuring the payment of taxes or other proceeds or fines.

The request before the Constitutional Court states that
the provision of 6 6 inadmissibly violates the right of individuals to
enjoy their property, indicating the decisions of
European Court of Human Rights and arguments are set out in
support the assertion that any expropriation without payment of
appropriate compensation violates the requirement of fair balance
between the public interest and the fundamental right of the individual and
constitutes excessive> state interference in
the implementation of the economic activity of those affected by the application of
8 bot TFP of ZDS commercial companies.

The norms of the Constitution reproduce the general meaning of
the provision of art. | of the Additional Protocol and as set out in
The first part of the opinion also concerns the request for the establishment of
inconsistency of the attacked text of 6 6 with the generally accepted norms of
international law. The meaning of the term "property" referred to in

the cited provision of the Convention is not explicitly defined.

Analyzing the text, I believe that it guarantees fundamental rights and
freedoms, one of which is the right to property without regulation
the limited property rights which are the subject of an explicit regulation in
local legislation. It is noted that everyone has the right to
uses his property and no one can be deprived of it,
except in the public interest and under the conditions laid down in
of the law. The provision of 6 6 corresponds to the cited requirement, as
by virtue of legislation in the interest of society> unifies

the regime of the right of use.

DEAR GENERAL CONSTITUTIONAL JUDGES,

In the light of the foregoing considerations, I consider that the request for a declaration
the unconstitutionality of the provision of 6 6 of the TFP of the Law on.
state property and its non-compliance with the generally accepted norm of

international law is unfounded and should be rejected.