JUDGMENT № 10Sofia, 10 May 2001constitutional case № 11/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Nedelcho Beronov (Promulgated, SG No. 47 of 18 May 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov - Rapporteur, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva National Assembly. The request maintains that the provision of Art. 52, para 6 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (ZINP), promulgated in SG, iss. 37 of 13 April 2001, contrary to the prohibition under Art. 65, para 2 of the Basic Law, creates inequality between the members of the Government and the other candidates for Members of Parliament, which violates Art. 10 and Art. 6, para. 2 of the Constitution. By order of 24 April 2001 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits and the President, the Council of Ministers, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, the Bulgarian Association for Fair Elections and the Civil Initiative for Free and Democratic Elections were constituted as interested parties. The case received an opinion only from the Council of Ministers, which set out the considerations for which the request of the group of MPs was considered unfounded. The Constitutional Court, considering the arguments and considerations developed in the request and in the submitted opinion, adopted the following: of Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement, the candidates for Members of Parliament who hold public office shall suspend its performance after their registration. The disputed paragraph 6 of the same Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement stipulates that the provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply to ministers and the Prime Minister, that their powers continue after their registration as candidates for MPs. The Constitutional Court has repeatedly had occasion to discuss the concept “Civil service”, associating it with activity for carrying out the functions of the state (Decision № 16 of 1997 under Code of Civil Procedure № 8 of 1997, SG No. 106/1997). However, the court has explicitly stated that there is no legal definition of the civil service, therefore the meaning and content of the term in individual cases must be disclosed in accordance with the specific objectives of the provisions and the institutions to which it relates (Decision № 5 of 1993 under Code of Civil Procedure № 6 of 1993, SG, issue 31/1983). This requires an assessment not only of the nature of the activity carried out, but also of the constitutional status of the Council of Ministers and its members. Decision of the Grand National Assembly (SNC) of 13 September 1991 on the legal status of members of the Council of Ministers registered as candidates in parliamentary elections, albeit on the occasion of the election law in force at the time, treats its provision, which in its first part reproduces textually Article 65, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The same wording has the beginning of the first paragraph of Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement. The decision belongs to the creator of the Constitution, expresses his will and understanding. In its same decision, the Grand National Assembly explicitly stated that the members of the Council of Ministers were not required to suspend the performance of their functions after registering as candidates for Members of Parliament. The considerations of the Supreme National Assembly set out in its decision fully substantiate why the members of the cabinet should not suspend the performance of their duties. This allows the considerations of the Supreme National Assembly to be accepted in the present case as well. The Constitutional Court has already had cases to do so in its Decision № 2/1991 under c.d. № 24/1991, SG No. 106/1991, in the reasons of which it is stated that “The National Assembly with a decision of 13 September 1991 reasonably accepted that Article 49 of ZINPOSK does not apply to members of the Council of Ministers, if they participate in the elections, because in view of the functions and responsibilities of its members the country cannot be left without a functioning government. ”As explained in the decision of the SJC, the members of the Council of Ministers cannot transfer their powers to other persons, including the Deputy Ministers, who support them, but cannot be responsible for them. It follows from the special status of the Council of Ministers as the supreme constitutional body of the executive power that the powers of its members continue to be exercised until the election. by the National Assembly of a new government. The same opinion was expressed by the Constitutional Court in Decision № 9 of 8 May 2001 under c.d. № 9/2001, which gave a mandatory interpretation of Article 65, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, namely that this constitutional provision does not apply to the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers. They are political figures and governing bodies that implement the domestic and foreign policy of the Republic of Bulgaria. According to Articles 105-108 of the Constitution, the government implements domestic and foreign policy, ensures public order and national security, implements the general management of the state administration and the Armed Forces, manages the implementation of the state budget, organizes the management of state property, concludes, approves and denounces the international treaties provided for in the law. These activities are carried out under the general direction of the Prime Minister, to whom the Constitution with Article 108, paragraph 2 directly assigns to coordinate the general policy of the government, for which he is responsible. Similar obligations and responsibilities for their actions weigh on the ministers for the ministries headed by them (Article 108, paragraph 3 of the Constitution). In order not to leave the country without a legitimate government, they can perform their functions in the case of their registration as candidates for MPs. The disputed paragraph 6 of Article 52 of the Law on Public Procurement is fully compliant with the mandatory interpretation given by the Constitutional Court of Article 65, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law, therefore it is not unconstitutional. The court has no reason to deviate from these decisions. the country cannot remain without a government, has found expression in several provisions of the Constitution. During the period after the termination of the powers of the previous one until the constitution of a new National Assembly and the election by it of a new Council of Ministers, the government performs its functions (Article 111, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Constitution). During this period, the Council of Ministers, elected by the previous National Assembly, operates. The same idea is enshrined in § 8 of the transitional and final provisions of the Basic Law. The powers of the Council of Ministers, respectively of its members, are terminated in the cases specified exhaustively in Article 111, paragraph 1 of the Constitution. The registration for participation in parliamentary elections is not included in the enumeration. The equality of the candidates in the election campaign is ensured by other means, but not by termination of the powers of the members of the Council of Ministers. In this sense is Decision № 2/1991 under c.d. № 24/1991, in which, although on the situation of another constitutional body (the President), the Constitutional Court stated that the equality of candidates in the election campaign should be sought on a different level than in the fact that the state A body of the highest rank will continue to exercise its constitutionally assigned powers. For the stated reasons and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Constitutional Court RESOLVED: Rejected the request XXXVIII National Assembly for establishing the unconstitutionality of the provision of Art. 52, para 6 of the Law on Election of Members of Parliament (SG, issue 37 of 13 April 2001).