JUDGMENT № 18Sofia, 25 October 2001constitutional case № 15/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Stefanka Stoyanova (Promulgated, SG No. 94 of 2 November 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - President, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova - rapporteur, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted on 6.VIII. 2001 at the request of 48 Members of the XXXIX National Assembly. The request is based on Article 149, paragraph 1, item 1 of the Constitution. With it the Constitutional Court was seised to give an obligatory interpretation of art. 113, para 1 in connection with art. 68, para 1 of the basic law on the issue: can the members of the Council of Ministers also hold the position of mayor, performed by them in In the request, the need for interpretation is justified by the fact that “ministers who are at the same time mayors of municipalities have been elected in the composition of the Council of Ministers” and have not resigned, but have applied for unpaid leave. ", They continue to" retain their position as mayor. " The opinion of the group of MPs on the issue is also presented. According to this opinion, there is an incompatibility between the two positions within the meaning of Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution and the elected minister must terminate the occupation of one of them. By order of 11.IX.2001 the request was admitted for consideration on the merits. and the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the National Association of Municipalities in Bulgaria have been constituted as interested parties. A written statement has been submitted only by the Council of Ministers. It maintains that Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution prohibits ministers from holding the position of mayor. The considerations in view of which the conclusion was made are in two directions: a) "the mayor… performs civil service", its occupation by ministers is constitutionally inadmissible and it is not terminated, but continues with the use of leave when it is actually interrupted. the temporary performance of the functions of this service "; b) Art. 37, para 4 of the Local Elections Act explicitly excludes the possibility for the Members of Parliament to be mayors at the same time, and due to the reference with Art. 113, para 1 to Art. 68, para 1 of the Constitution the incompatibility established with This provision shall also apply to the Ministers. The Constitutional Court considered the request, considered the considerations contained therein and in the opinion submitted, and in order to rule, took into account the following: 1. Part of the legal status of ministers is the incompatibility of this capacity with other positions and activities. The incompatibility is established by Article 113 of the Constitution. It contains a ban on the holding of certain positions and the performance of certain activities by the members of the Council of Ministers. These positions and activities are not listed in the said provision. As far as their type and the features that characterize them are concerned, it (in para 1) refers to the service and activity incompatible with the position of a Member of Parliament. In this way, it places the same restrictions on reconciliation as exist for MPs. In addition, it provides for the possibility (in paragraph 2) to expand the requirements for incompatibility by appointing by the National Assembly other positions and activities that the members of the Council of Ministers may not hold or perform. In terms of the possibility provided for increasing the scope of the restrictions, the incompatibility for the ministers differs from the one that applies to the MPs.2. The referred reference under Art. 113, para 1 is to Art. 68, para 1 of the Basic Law, where the incompatibility of the position of a Member of Parliament with the performance and performance of other service and activity is settled. The latter in their determination are divided into two groups: a) civil service and b) activity, the incompatibility of which follows from a law introducing the relevant restriction on MPs. The constitutional ban on the performance of these services and activities by the Members of Parliament undoubtedly also applies to the members of the Council of Ministers. The material on the type of activities that are the subject of the second of the groups is provided for possible legislation. Therefore, the restriction on combining such activities with the capacity of a minister will be applied only when they are provided by law. However, there is no requirement for additional legislation regarding the services covered by the first group. There is no obstacle for them to be explicitly mentioned in separate laws, but it should be borne in mind that their concretization in one or in different legal acts is not a prerequisite to apply the ban on their occupation by members of the Council of Ministers. The effect of this prohibition is manifested and it is applied regardless of the presence or absence of a law determining the positions, the implementation of which is a civil service.3. The content of the notion of civil service under Article 68, paragraph 1 of the Constitution is important for determining the scope of the ban on the holding of such service by the members of the Council of Ministers. The Constitutional Court has had occasion to interpret this concept. In the interpretation with Decision № 5 of 6.IV.1993 under c.d. № 6/93 (SG, issue 31/93) has accepted that the civil service “is generally дейност an activity for the performance of the functions of the state”, as “this activity is performed on behalf of the state and for realization of the powers of its bodies provided for in the Constitution ”, without, however, it being“ directly related to the production of material values ​​”. In the same sense is Decision № 4 of 30.III.1993 under c.d. № 3/93 (SG, issue 30/93). According to him, civil service is "the performance of a certain state function". At the same time, it is stated that this feature does not exhaust the content of the concept, and that outlining its framework should not ignore other features that exclude it "to be reduced to any activity useful or necessary for the state and taking into account the given interpretation, from which it does not deviate and taking into account the nature and character of the mayoral institution, the Constitutional Court accepts that in view of the incompatibility under Art. 113, para. 1 of the Basic Law, the members of the Council of Ministers may not be mayors of municipalities.4. The mayor is a body of the executive power in the municipality, which is the main administrative-territorial unit and in which the local self-government is carried out (art. 136, para 1 and art. 139 of the Constitution). As such, he manages all the activities of the municipality to implement the decisions of the municipal council and the population. In addition to the municipal mayor is an administrative body, which in this capacity performs state functions and is subject to direct control by state administration bodies. The conclusion is confirmed by Art. 139, para 2 and Art. 144 of the Constitution. The first of the provisions of the mayor assigns the implementation of all decisions of the municipal council, without excluding such decisions as the council has taken by delegation from central state bodies. In addition, it is assigned to organize the implementation of the tasks arising from the laws, without excluding such tasks as may be assigned to it by central state bodies in cases specified by law. The second of the mentioned provisions allows the provision in the law of control for legality by the central administration over the acts of the mayor of the municipality. Namely the constitutionally admissible form of control by an administrative body over acts of the mayors of municipalities and the nature of their indicated powers are grounds to assume that they also act as administrative bodies. From the above regarding the constitutional regulation of the legal status and powers of mayors that their functions are related to the exercise of state power on the territory of the respective municipality. In this sense, their implementation is an activity for the performance of the functions of the state, which activity, as not directly related to the production of material values, constitutes a civil service. Therefore, it is included in the scope of the prohibition under Art. 113, para 1 of the Basic Law and in view of this prohibition it is constitutionally inadmissible to occupy the position and combine it by members of the Council of Ministers.5. As already noted, the effect of the ban on holding a position, the performance of which is a civil service, does not require, but at the same time does not exclude additional legislation. For reasons of avoiding a possible dispute, ambiguity or for other reasons, the law may explicitly specify positions that members of the Council of Ministers may not hold. The Constitutional Court notes that the subject of such legislation is the incompatibility of the question. Article 37, paragraph 4 of the Local Elections Act (SG, issue 66/95) allows a Member of Parliament to be a candidate for mayor. However, the same provision also states that if elected, he shall cease to be a Member of Parliament. Therefore, the performance of the functions of mayor is incompatible with the position of a Member of Parliament. In view of the reference under Art. 113, para 1 to Art. 68, para 1 of the Constitution, it must be assumed that the incompatibility also refers to the holding of the position of mayor by members of the Council of Ministers. Thus, although this incompatibility derives from the Constitution and although the constitutional norm establishing it is directly applicable, the restriction on reconciliation is also contained in law.6. The prohibition, which is introduced by art. 113, para 1 of the Constitution in relation to the members of the Council of Ministers, is for the holding by them of a certain position and the performance of a certain activity. The holding of a position continues from the emergence of the powers to perform the functions of its implementation until the termination of these powers. The necessary conditions and preconditions for their occurrence, as well as for their termination are not contained in the Constitution. They are subject to legislation, which may be and is different for different activities. Regardless of the difference in the regulation, it should be noted that the use of leave (paid, unpaid, official) under conditions and in accordance with the law is constitutional. right of the workers and employees - art. 48, para 5 of the Constitution. His exercise may not be grounds for termination of office. As a legal position with a longer or shorter duration, the position continues during the duration of the duly authorized and used leave. Therefore, if there is a restriction for its combination by those performing certain functions - for example by MPs under Article 68, paragraph 1 of the Constitution or by members of the Council of Ministers under Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution, this restriction does not fall away. For these reasons and on the grounds of Article 149, paragraph 1, item 1 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court DECIDES: The incompatibility under Article 113, paragraph 1 of the Constitution excludes the holding of the position of mayor of a municipality by members of The Council of Ministers and this restriction on reconciliation shall not be waived in the use of leave by those holding this position.