JUDGMENT № 15Sofia, 31 May 2001constitutional case № 3/2001 Judge-Rapporteur Stefanka Stoyanova (Promulgated, SG, issue 53 of 12 June 2001) Statute: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov, Stefanka Stoyanova - Rapporteur, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted on 1.II.2001 at the request of 70 MPs from The request disputes the constitutionality of provisions of the Hunting and Game Protection Act (ZLOD) - SG, issue 78 of 28.IX.2000, namely: Art. 4, Art. 7, para 1, Article 29, Article 30 and Article 31. The court with a ruling of 22. ІІ. In 2001 it admitted the request for consideration on the merits and constituted as interested parties the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, the Commission for Protection of Competition, the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria, the Union of Foresters in Bulgaria and the Animal protection. Written opinions were submitted by all interested parties within the term given by the court, except for the Commission for Protection of Competition and the Society for the Protection of Animals. Written opinions were also received from the Union for Nature Protection and the Society of Foresters and Researchers. The court discussed the request, assessed the considerations contained in it and in the submitted written statements, and in order to rule, took into account the following: Under Article 4 of the Law on Hunting, according to Article 4 of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the hunting area is organized. , the management of the hunting farm and the control of the game management. According to the request, the provision contradicts Article 4, paragraph 2, Article 5, paragraph 1 and Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. It is alleged that it establishes a monopoly position and does not create conditions for free development of civil society, as it assigns the listed activities to only one legal entity and excludes the participation of the public organization of hunters. The request is supported in some opinions - the Union of hunters and fishermen in Bulgaria, the Union for Nature Protection and the Society of Foresters and Scientists. The other opinions maintain that it is unfounded. The court finds the request unfounded. The activities assigned by the disputed provision of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry are divided into three groups. The type, character and essence of each of them can be determined on the basis of art. 7 - 12, art. 14 and art. 66 - 67 ZLOD. The content of these legal norms indicates that the activity of the first of the groups - the organization of the hunting area, is not limited to the distribution of hunting areas. It also includes the establishment of state game breeding stations, among the tasks of which is the preservation and enrichment of the species diversity of the game, as well as its protection related to the construction of hunting facilities, the use of forests by the state forest fund for habitat improvement. The same legal norms also indicate that the activity under the other two groups covers the management and control of the protection of the game, its protection and maintenance of the environment necessary for its normal life activity. In view of the above, the court accepts that their implementation is implementation. of the constitutional obligation of the state to ensure the maintenance and diversity of living nature. This obligation derives from Article 15 of the Basic Law. Protecting forests and game is an important part of it. Their protection imposes the requirement for normative regulation of the relations in this direction and for determination of institutions, which are assigned the functions, following from the normative regulation and ensuring its observance. Precisely because the obligation is to the state, it can be determined by the supreme legislative body. such institutions. The existence of the same requirement justifies para 4 of art. 17 of the Constitution. With it, the regime of the objects of state property is reserved for legal regulation. In addition to the acquisition and disposal, the regime of property objects also covers their management. As the game is state property - art. 2, para 1 ZLOD, the settlement of the regime of this object of ownership also refers to the determination of the subject, from which the management and control functions of the management will be exercised. The pointed constitutional requirement is observed with the contested provision. It is, on the one hand, part of the legal regulation of the relations related to the protection of the game and, on the other hand, specifies the legal entity to which the activities for the implementation of the noted constitutional obligation of the state are assigned. It does not violate Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law. The functions, which with this provision are assigned to the legal entity determined by it, have organizational, managerial and control character. They do not constitute an economic activity. Therefore, their assignment to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is not an establishment of a monopoly position and does not violate the principle of equality of economic entities. There is no violation of Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. Civil society is a human community that is free from the political guardianship of the state. Structurally, it covers various organizations and corporations, including non-profit associations. One of the main prerequisites for its construction and for ensuring its stable development is the right of citizens to associate freely and voluntarily. There is an obligation for the state to create conditions for free development of civil society - Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Constitution. The contested provision is without prejudice to the performance of that obligation. It does not contain any obstacles to the exercise of the right of association (formation of associations, determination of their goals and development of the activity for which they are registered). It is true that the activities listed in Article 4 of ZLOD are assigned only to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and thus the participation of civil society structures in them is excluded. However, this does not justify another conclusion. As already pointed out, the organization of the hunting area, the management of the hunting farm and the control of game management are activities, the implementation of which is fulfillment, albeit partial, of a constitutional obligation - to ensure maintenance and diversity. of wildlife. As this obligation belongs to the state, the issue of providing certain functions to the structures of the civil society can and should be resolved by it in the normative regulation of the relations in this direction, and when it is necessary. The Constitution does not provide for any requirements in relation to resolving this issue. Whether such functions will be assigned and if so - what will be their type and scope and to which of the associations will be provided, is the exclusive competence of the legislator. In this case the legislative assessment is for inclusion of hunting associations in the circle of the subjects, from which the game is managed, but not in the circle of those, from which the management and control activities under art. 4 ZLOD are exercised. The Court did not find that this distribution of activities between the various subjects affected constitutional values. At the same time, it notes that the management of the game, covering the activities explicitly mentioned in Art. 37, Art. 46, para 4, Art. 68, para 4, Art. 78, para 1 ZLOD, is also part of the implementation of the stated constitutional obligation of the state. Insofar as the participation in them contributes to the activation and expansion of the functions of the respective associations in their interaction with state institutions, their assignment contributes to the development of civil society. As not contradicting the discussed constitutional norms, the disputed provision is not inconsistent with Art. , para 1 of the Constitution. Therefore, the request in this part should be rejected. Under Art. 7, para 1 ZLOD The provision of Art. 7, para 1 ZLOD allows the distribution of the hunting area in the hunting economic regions to be carried out regardless of the fund borders and the ownership of the lands, forests and water areas. The request states that the same provision contradicts Article 17 of the Constitution, as it restricts the rights of forest owners. The request is not supported in the submitted written statements. The court considers the request unfounded in this part as well. When separating the hunting areas under the manner provided for in Article 7, paragraph 1 of ZLOD, they undoubtedly include forests owned by individuals. Therefore, game management is also carried out in these forests. However, its implementation is not provided to the owners, but to the persons listed in Article 34 ZLOD - state game breeding stations, scientific institutes and universities, whose scientific and educational activities are related to forestry and hunting, hunting associations that are duly registered and unite hunting teams from neighboring hunting regions, and other Bulgarian legal entities. They exercise rights (under Art. 46, para. 4, Art. 68, para. 4 ZLOD) and perform obligations (under Art. 37, Art. 68, para. 3, Art. 78 ZLOD), which is related to the use of forest areas for passage, stay, construction of hunting facilities and other activities covered by game management. The regulation thus adopted does not violate the constitutional requirement for legal protection of the right to property (Art. 17, para. 1) and the constitutional principle of inviolability of private property (Art. 17, para. 3). This principle does not exclude the legal possibility for restriction of private property and its content is not equivalent to the establishment of an absolute prohibition on such restrictions. The conclusion is confirmed by the circumstance that after the proclamation of this principle the Constitution (art. 17, para 5) allows under certain conditions the compulsory expropriation of property. It is also confirmed by the fact that the Constitution establishes priorities (for example protection and reproduction of the environment - art. 15, preservation of arable land for agricultural purposes - art. 21, protection of the national historical and cultural heritage - art. 23), protection of which is related to property restrictions. At the same time, it should be added that the noted constitutional requirement under Article 17, paragraph 1 is to guarantee and protect by law the right to property within the limits within which it can be exercised. These boundaries are important for outlining the essence of the law itself. According to Article 57, paragraph 2 of the Basic Law, they are determined by the rights and legitimate interests of other legal entities, whose impact the constitutional norm does not allow. The above should be taken into account when assessing the constitutionality of the disputed provision. The delineation of the hunting economic regions is connected with the establishment of state game breeding stations, the activity of which is the preservation of the game diversity and the preservation of the genetic fund. In addition, the delineation of these areas is a prerequisite for the organization of game management, which also includes activities for conservation and enrichment of species diversity. In view of the subject-matter of the activities, the area in which they are exercised by the entities concerned cannot, of course, be dependent on forest ownership. The activities, aimed at achieving the protection of game as a national treasure, protect a constitutional value under Article 15 - the maintenance and diversity of wildlife. It is the provision of its protection and the ownership of the game that justify the distribution of the hunting area in the manner provided for in Art. 7, para 1 ZLOD. They make the restrictions imposed by this distribution constitutionally permissible, all the more so as these restrictions are balanced by the rights of the persons concerned regulated in other provisions - some of their obligations for game management can be fulfilled by the respective legal entities only after concluding a contract with the owners. of forests (art. 38 ZLOD), the latter are due compensation for the damages from the game (art. 79 ZLOD), they are entitled to part of the funds of the national fund “Bulgarian forest” when their forests fall in the area of ​​the state game breeding stations (Article 95, item 47 of the Forest Act). That is why the request must be rejected in this part. Under Art. 29, 30 and 31 ZLODThree provisions regulate the association of persons who have acquired the right to hunt. According to Article 29 of ZLOD, these persons may unite in hunting teams. When uniting them in hunting teams with neighboring hunting economic regions, according to Art. 30 ZLOD they establish hunting associations, which are legal entities registered under the terms and conditions of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities (LNPO) - SG, issue 81 of 6. X.2000, which repealed Articles 134 - 154 of the Law on Persons and the Family. For the latter, in turn, Article 31 of the ZLOD allows to establish on a voluntary basis regional hunting associations and a national hunting association, which are legal entities without the right to economic activity and which are also registered under the terms and conditions of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities. the request maintains that they contradict Article 44 of the Constitution because they “prescribe new forms of association against the will of the hunters” and, by seizing the activities of an existing organization, have the effect of “forcibly destroying civil society structures”. It is also maintained that they are in contradiction with Article 19, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, as they exclude the regional hunting associations and the national hunting association from the subjects of economic activity. The written opinions of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers are unfounded. the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry and the Union of Foresters in Bulgaria. In the other written statements - of the Union of Hunters and Fishermen in Bulgaria, the Union for Nature Protection and the Society of Foresters and Researchers, the request is supported. The court considers that the disputed provisions do not infringe the constitutional right of association. They do not create an obligation for membership, but presuppose a voluntary grouping of persons who have acquired the right to hunt. The conclusion follows from the fact that they allow the establishment of associations without membership in the same associations being set as a condition for participation in hunting. Therefore, the voluntary nature of the association is not violated. On the contrary - it is guaranteed by other provisions that ensure the exercise of this right (§ 3, para. 4 of the transitional and final provisions of ZLOD) and at the same time explicitly regulate hunting by persons who have acquired the right to hunt but are not members of a hunting association (Art. .51 THIEF). The freedom of association has not been violated either, because without thwarting it and without hindering in any way its manifestation, art. 29-31 ZLOD explicitly recognize and guarantee the right of organization. It is true that with the thus adopted regulation the obligatory membership in a certain organization of hunters and the raising of the membership legal relationship in condition for acquiring and exercising the right to hunt are abolished. However, dropping them is not a ban on membership in this organization. Therefore, it does not affect the voluntary and free association of those who have the right to hunt, who can and must decide for themselves whether to terminate or continue their membership. The creation of this opportunity by excluding the obligation to membership ensures, as indicated, the voluntary nature of the association. It is also true that it is the hunting associations under Article 30 ZLOD are among the legal entities from which the game is managed (Art. 34 ZLOD). ). However, this does not mean the creation of a situation which benefits one association at the expense of others and thus violates the freedom of association. Participation in game management is an opportunity for various legal entities, their range, including "other Bulgarian legal entities" is wide and their selection is done through competition or by negotiation (Articles 34 - 36 ZLOD). It follows from the above that the exercise of the activity of management is not a privilege of one organization, limiting the activity of other organizations, and hence the right of association. On the other hand, the adoption of this legislation, expanding the range of entities that can be granted game management, is not a forced seizure of the activities of an existing organization of hunters and deprivation of their right to associate. Since the game is state property and its management, including its protection and enrichment of species diversity, is a fulfillment of a constitutional obligation of the state under Article 15, it may make changes in the entities to which it assigns its functions in this direction. In this case, the implementation of such a change is not accompanied by a ban or termination of an organization, reduction of its membership or encroachment on its property. Therefore, its implementation does not violate the voluntary and free association. .19, ал.2) for equal legal conditions for economic activity of all citizens and legal entities. The established hunting associations are not deprived of the opportunity to carry out economic activity. They can carry it out within and under the conditions of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities, which means that this activity must have the marks under para 3 of art. 3 of the Law on Non-Profit Legal Entities and the legal entities must not distribute profit according to para 6 of art. Without the right to such activity are only the higher organizational structures formed by them - regional hunting associations and national hunting association. The exclusion of these structures from the economic activity does not lead to inequality under Art. 19, para 2 of the Basic Law. The same structures are not assigned game management functions. Their construction is not even obligatory, but when they are established, they are formed by associations under Article 30 ZLOD. Therefore, their composition includes organizations for each of which it is permissible to carry out business activities. In view of this, it cannot be considered that the associations in national or regional hunting associations are not provided with equal legal conditions within the meaning of the said constitutional norm. For these reasons and on the grounds of Art. 149, para 1, item 2 of The Constitution The Constitutional Court DECIDES: Rejects the request of 70 Members of the XXXVIII National Assembly to declare the unconstitutionality of Art. 4, Art. 7, para 1 and Art. 29, 30 and 31 of the Hunting and Game Protection Act - SG, issue 78 of 28.IX.2000.