RESOLUTION № 11Sofia, 21 May 2001constitutional case № 18/2000, Judge-Rapporteur Nedelcho Beronov (Promulgated, SG No. 51 of 5 June 2001) in: Hristo Danov - Chairman, Georgi Markov, Dimitar Gochev, Todor Todorov, Nedelcho Beronov - Rapporteur, Stefanka Stoyanova, Margarita Zlatareva, Vasil Gotsev, Lyudmil Neykov, Rumen Yankov, Zhivan Belchev, Penka Tomcheva The case was instituted at the request of 57 MPs from XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of the provisions of Art. 101, para 1 and 5, Art. 102, para 1, Art. 104, para 1 and Art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or at the proposal of the Minister of Health ”of the Medical Establishments Act (PHA), promulgated, SG, issue 62/1999, amended. and supplemented, SG No. 88/1999, SG No. 113/1999, SG No. 36/2000 and SG No. 65/2000. In addition, the establishment of the latter provision is requested (Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of the PPL) and for non-compliance with the European Charter of Local Self-Government (EHMS), promulgated, SG, issue 46/2000. The request maintains that the specified provisions of the PPL violate the exclusive right of municipal councils to dispose of municipal property. In the transformation of public health care institutions into commercial companies, the Minister of Health illegally disposes of foreign (municipal) and not state property. With the redistribution of the capital of the transformed hospitals, the nationalization of municipal property was essentially carried out. Therefore, the petitioners consider that the provisions specified in the request contradict the principles of the rule of law, local self-government, protection of property - Article 4, paragraph 1, Article 17, paragraph 5 and Article 140 of the Constitution. The provision of Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of the LPH is alleged to restrict the municipal councils in exercising their competencies and therefore does not comply with Art. 4, items 2 and 4 of the EHMS. On the grounds of Art. 22, para 3 of the Law on the Constitutional Court (CCA) to be declared null and void the acts of the Minister of Health for the transformation of the municipal health establishments. With a ruling of 18 January 2001 the Constitutional Court allowed the request for consideration constitutes as interested parties the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Health, the National Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria, the Bulgarian Medical Union and the Union of Dentists in Bulgaria. Stakeholders were given the opportunity to express their views on the request in writing. The National Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the Minister of Health and the Bulgarian Medical Union expressed their written views that the request was completely unfounded, setting out detailed reasons for its rejection. It is maintained that the disputed provisions of the Law on Public Health change the status of public health facilities, transforming them from those supported by the budget into commercial companies. According to the Municipal Property Act (MPA) and the Law on Local Self-Government and Local Administration (LLSGA) municipal property are the objects of the municipal infrastructure of local significance, intended for health care of the population. The united (former district) hospitals listed in the appendix to Art. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health serve the population of all municipalities within the former district (now district), and not only the population of the municipality where they are located. Therefore, they are not municipal property. The authors of these opinions point out that the protection of the health of citizens is a public interest of the highest order, which is why the basic law allows state regulation of public relations in this area. According to the authors of the same opinions Article 109, paragraph 1, item 3 of the LPH corresponds to the EHMS, which allows restriction of the powers of the local self-government bodies by another authority, when this is within the law. In these statements it is also noted that the orders of the Minister of Health for transformation of public health facilities are issued in implementation of the current at the time of their issuance PPE, therefore can not be acts issued by an incompetent authority within the meaning of Art. 22, para 3 ZKS. In addition, it is stated that according to Article 125, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the Supreme Administrative Court rules on disputes over the legality of acts of ministers. The National Association of Municipalities in the Republic of Bulgaria takes the opposite view - that the disputed provisions are unconstitutional. Considerations for non-compliance with MHMS are not specified. The author of this opinion considers that the regional hospitals are public municipal property according to § 7 of the transitional and final provisions of LLSGA and art. 2, para 1, items 6 and 9 ZOS. According to the same author, the guaranteed constitutional right of ownership of the municipalities has been violated by Art. 17, para 1 of the Basic Law, as the provision of Art. 101, para 5 of the PPA transfers municipal property to joint stock companies in which the municipality is not sole owner of the capital. There is an understanding that with Art. This is not done by the competent body - the municipal council, to be treated as the formation of a company with property, municipal property. Having discussed the considerations set forth in the request and in the submitted opinions of the parties, the Constitutional Court accepts the following: І. On the request for establishing unconstitutionality The provisions of Art. 101, para 1 and 5, Art. 102, para 1 and Art. 104, para 1 of the Public Health Act are from the section “Transformation of public health establishments”. The basis of their dispute is the question whether these establishments or part of them are owned by the municipalities. This requires the same issue to be discussed first. The Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria specifies municipal property as one of the types of property, but does not contain provisions that specify the objects of the same property or specify criteria for such specification. The Constitutional Court had an occasion in the interpretation of Article 17, paragraph 2 of the Constitution to point out that only a law can determine the range of things that are public or private property of municipalities. The Constitutional Court would seize the prerogatives of the legislator if it tried to distinguish the public property of the state and the municipalities from their private property (Decision № 19 of 1993 under Code of Civil Procedure № 11 of 1993, SG, issue 4 of 1994). ). Article 17, paragraph 4 provides for these issues to be regulated by law. Therefore, it is necessary to keep in mind the legal framework of municipal property. After municipal property was absent as a legal institution in the Bulgarian legal system for more than 40 years, the restoration of its legal framework was carried out by amending the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bulgaria in 1971 and The Property Act (AA) in 1990 (SG, issue 29 and issue 31 of 1990) and further developed it with the amendment of the same law upon adoption in the following year of LLSGA (SG, issue 77 of 1991) . According to § 7, item 6 of the transitional and final provisions of LLSGA with the entry into force of this law become the property of the municipalities exhaustively specified state property, including the objects of municipal infrastructure of local importance, intended for health care. The same legal framework is included in Art. 2, para 1, item 6 (SG, issue 44 of 1996) and item 9 of the AIA (SG, issue 96 of 1999), adding that the indicated sites must be intended for servicing the population of the respective municipality. The disputed provisions are in line with the wording they had when the PPA was adopted in July 1999 and regulate the transformation of the existing at the same time public health facilities.1. According to Article 101, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Health, the existing public health care institutions, dispensaries and hospital diagnostic and treatment structures at higher medical schools are transformed into medical institutions - sole proprietorships, by order of the Minister of Health. The provision applies to all health establishments mentioned in it, regardless of their ownership. According to the petitioners, the provision referred to the municipal hospitals means that the Minister of Health has illegally disposed of foreign (municipal) and not state property. The health establishments established by the Council of Ministers for the needs of public health are public - § 2 of the Additional Provisions to the Public Health Act (EPA), Supplement SG, issue 12/1997. Until the entry into force of the EPA, the status of health establishments shall be regulated in the EPA, according to which these establishments are public and private - Art. , issue 12 of 1997, amended, issue 62 of 1999). This law does not divide public health facilities into state and municipal depending on ownership. A public health institution shall be opened, transformed and closed by the Council of Ministers on a proposal of the Minister of Health (Art. 2, para 2 EPA, amended, SG, issue 12 of 1997, issue 70 of 1998 and issue .62 of 1999). Thus, the existing public health institutions were created, which are transformed according to the Health Insurance Act. The status of the public health establishments is changed, as they are transformed from those on budget support into commercial companies. With the order for transformation under art. 101, para 1 of the Public Health Act the respective properties and things lose their quality of public property and become private state, respectively municipal property. There are no constitutional obstacles for this transformation to take place by an act of a minister, insofar as in this case this power has been delegated to him by law. The Constitution authorizes the legislator by law to determine "The regime of its objects of municipal property" - Article 17, paragraph 4. This power includes the conversion of public property into private. The one who can indicate which municipal property is public and which is private, can also transform. At the same time, as soon as the legislator can transform, he may by law delegate this power to a body designated by him. According to the Constitution, the Minister of Health has been designated as such a body in the Health Insurance Act. The Constitution does not prohibit the legislator from deciding which is private or public property. The transformation is not a violation of the basic law. By virtue of Art. 101, para 1 of the LPL, applied and interpreted together with Art. 101, para 6 of the LPL, the right of ownership over the transformed public establishments, other than those under para 4 and 5 , is transformed into a right of ownership over the capital of the company. The holder of the right of ownership remains the same. This is the municipality on whose territory the seat of the company is located. The rights of the owner are exercised by the municipal council. Initially the order for transformation under art. 101, para 1 of the LPL does not affect the holder of the right of ownership. In this case the right of ownership of the municipality over the medical establishment is not taken away. The property retains its municipal character. Only the legal form in which this right is exercised changes. The property law consequence of the order is the change in the nature of the right of ownership - from public law to private law. Art. 101, para 1 of the Land Use Act does not nationalize municipal property. There is no hypothesis of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution, because there is no compulsory expropriation of property, which from municipal becomes state. There is no violation of constitutional norms guaranteeing the right to municipal property and the request on this ground in this part should rejected.2. The second disputed provision is of Art. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Health. This article creates a special (within the Law on Public Health) regulation for medical establishments explicitly indicated in an annex to the law (all regional hospitals in the individual cities - 26 in total). These establishments are municipal property according to art. 2, para 1, items 6 and 9 of the LPA and § 7, item 6 of the LLSGA. They are medical establishments of local significance within the meaning of Article 101 of the Law on Public Health. This is evident from the circumstance that the regulation under Art. 101, para 5 of the LPL is special, independent. It is separate from the regulation under Article 101, paragraph 4, which regulates the transformation of "national centers engaged in medical activities". The argument that hospitals are not public property is Article 2 of the State Property Act (LSA, SG, issue 44 of 1996). Its provision can be summarized - these are the properties intended for "permanent satisfaction of public needs of national importance through common use". The argument that the former district hospitals cease to be public municipal property because they no longer serve one, but several municipalities or the right of ownership to be associated with the mixed financing of municipal sites. Indeed, one can argue about the content of the term “local significance” used in §§ 6 and 7 of the LLSGA and in the APA. There is indeed room for interpretation here, but which, in the presence of the expression "needs of national importance" in the LSA, does not create any difficulty. These will be local needs that meet the needs of the residents of the municipality, not the population of the country. The rule cannot be absolute and the needs will be local even if they satisfy the needs of several municipalities. As far as the former district hospitals, described in the application of art. 101, para 5 of the PPA, are public municipal property, the provisions contradict art. .5 of the Constitution and in essence constitute compulsory expropriation of property without state needs. After the transformation of the medical establishments under Art. 101, para 5 of the PPA into joint stock companies the right of ownership over their capital is acquired ex lege respectively by the state - for 51 per cent of the capital and of the municipalities - 49 per cent of the capital. The law stipulates that shareholders may be several municipalities, as their participation within the 49 per cent provided to them is distributed proportionally to the population living in them. legislation performs two functions. It directly transfers ownership from the municipalities to the state (in cases where the municipalities originally owned more than half of the public medical institution); it redistributes the right of ownership over the hospital between the municipalities according to the number of the population. In both directions the norm has an alienating effect. In relation to the state, the norm performs the function of nationalization without the conditions of art. 17, para 5 of the Constitution being met (justified state need, preliminary and equivalent compensation). The state acquires a majority ownership of the converted hospital, whether or not it has ever owned the hospital before. In cases where the property was entirely or predominantly municipal, its subsequent nationalization (51 percent of it) is always the expropriation of municipal property in favor of the state. The prohibition for such expropriation is contained in Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law. The Constitution obliges the state to guarantee the right to municipal property - Article 17, paragraph 1. On the other hand, the provision of Article 17, paragraph 5 of the Basic Law protects municipal property against the state. To deny this would be to render meaningless the independent constitutionally established type of municipal property. The concept of "municipal property" in Article 17 and the constitutional norm of Article 140 "The municipality has the right to its property" will remain empty phrases and the state will at any time at its discretion by law to expropriate municipal property. 101, para 5 of the Law on Public Procurement creates unjust enrichment of some of them at the expense of others. It turns out that a municipality that has built, expanded and / or furnished the hospital exclusively with its own funds will receive less participation, as its population is smaller than that of the neighboring municipality. the construction and furnishing of the hospital, and with the act for transformation he turns out to be the owner of a property.Obviously the regulation creates conditions for violation of the principles of justice - preamble of the Constitutions of the rule of law - Art. 4, para. 1 and again of the prohibition for compulsory expropriation of property - Art. 17, para. activity - art. 19, para 2 of the Constitution. That is why the provision of art. 101, para 5 of the LPL is unconstitutional.3. The provision of Article 102, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Health refers to the transformation of existing public health facilities for outpatient care without explaining who acquires ownership of the capital of the established sole proprietorships. state, due to which the allegations of violation of Art. 17, para 5 and Art. 140 of the Constitution are unfounded. All public health establishments for outpatient care are municipal property. Therefore, the undisputed para 4 of the same art. 102 of the LPL refers to acts of a municipal council, and para 6 - to managerial functions of the mayor of the municipality.The also undisputed para 1, item 2 of Art. 109 of the Public Health Act states that the municipal councils as owners take decisions for the privatization of this category of medical establishments. is a violation of the Constitution, as explained in the discussion of Article 101, paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Health. The request should be rejected in this part.4. Pursuant to Art. 104, para 1 of the Public Health Act with the transformation of the public health establishments under Art. 101, 102 and 103 the movable and immovable property provided for management and administration - state or municipal property, included in the balance sheets of the health establishments transform, become the property of the companies. The transformation into commercial companies is associated with changes in ownership. The state or the municipality loses ownership over the material composition of the property included in the balance sheets of the health care institutions. The right of ownership is transformed into the right of ownership over the capital of commercial companies. The owner of the capital also acquires management and control rights. The holder of all real rights is the company as an independent legal entity, not the owner of the capital of the company. These changes do not lead to the transformation of municipal property into state or vice versa. The holders of the right of ownership over the property of the transformed public health establishments become holders of the right of ownership over the capital of the established commercial companies. At the creation of art. 104, para 1 of the Law on Public Health the legislator acted in implementation is not unconstitutional.5. The constitutionality of the requirement under Art. 109, para 1 item 3 of the Law on Privatization and all actions related to the privatization procedure of the municipal councils on the privatization of medical establishments with municipal participation to be carried out “after approval or under proposal of the Minister of Health. ”The privatization actions are of an administrative nature; they aim at the transfer of ownership of natural or legal persons. The holder of this right is changed. Therefore, an inalienable element of the right of ownership is the power of the owner with an autonomous act to dispose of his right. The will of the owner (municipal council) to dispose of his right of ownership by transferring it to another (natural or legal person) cannot depend on the approval or permission of a third party (state body). The introduction of the disputed requirement inadmissibly infringes the right of ownership of the municipality, which is why it is unconstitutional - Article 140 of the Basic Law. The declaration of the unconstitutionality of the disputed part of Art. 109, para 1, item 3 of the LPL has as a consequence its termination and existence as a legal norm of the current legislation (Art. 151, para 2 of the Constitution and Art. 2 ZKS). Therefore, the assessment under Article 149, paragraph 1, item 4 of the Basic Law for non-compliance of the same legal provision with the ECHR is pointless. The request should not be considered in this part. In this sense is the practice of the court - Decision № 19/1997 on c.d. № 13/1997, SG, issue 120/1997, Decision № 9/1998 under c.d. № 6/1998, SG, issue 45/1998 and Decision № 8/1999 on c.d. № 4/1999, SG, issue 47/1999. For the stated reasons and on the grounds of art. 149, para 1, items 2 and 4 of the Constitution the Constitutional Court RESOLVES: Declares unconstitutional the provisions of art. 101, para 5 and art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or upon proposal of the Minister of Health” of the Medical Establishments Act, promulgated, SG, iss. 62/1999, amended and add., SG, no. 88/1999, 113/1999, 36/2000 and 65/2000. Rejects the request of 57 MPs from the XXXVIII National Assembly to establish the unconstitutionality of Art. 101, para 1, Art. 102, para 1 and art. 104, para 1 of the same law. Leave without consideration the request for establishing inconsistency of art. 109, para 1, item 3 regarding the words “after approval or upon proposal of the Minister of Health” of the same law with the European Charter of Local Self-Government.